---
title: Exchanging Senjafuda
layout: exchanging-senjafuda
permalink: /exchanging-senjafuda.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

## Exchanging Senjafuda
The act of pasting senjafuda on temple or shrine walls incorporated a spirit of play into what was at least nominally a religious activity. With the arrival of senjafuda for exchange, that spirit of play came to dominate—although the ties to pilgrimage and worship were never entirely forgotten.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll087" width="100" %}

## Exchanging
Contemporary accounts of senjafuda mention exchange meetings happening by the end of the 18th century. In other words, by the 1790s people who were making slips to paste up at religious institutions were also getting together with like-minded people at tea shops or restaurants to trade those slips with each other. By the 1830s, this led to the formation of organized clubs—called ren 連—of senjafuda aficionados. These groups would not only exchange slips with each other, they would hold large meetings at which they would exchange slips with other groups.

Slips meant for pasting continued to be mostly simple monochrome objects, but as collecting and trading slips became the focus of most aficionados' attention, specially designed “exchange slips” (kōkanfuda 交換札) developed. Exchange slips were meant to be appreciated up close rather than glimpsed from afar, and so more attention was paid to their design elements and workmanship.

This led to the elaborate, full-color slips that are the focus of this digital exhibit. Senjafuda aficionados began to enlist the services of professional artists and craftsmen to design and print their exchange slips. Many of these professionals in turn came to participate in the senjafuda world themselves. The higher artistic quality of the slips in turn attracted more participants. The formation of ren allowed for better organization of the design and financing of slips, as well as better coordination of large-scale designs or series of designs.

Part of the playfulness of senjafuda exchange and collecting came simply from the chance to appreciate beautiful, well-made objects. But of course, just as with pasting slips, an element of competition could be present, as individuals or groups strove to outdo one another in the beauty or cleverness of their slips. Cleverness in particular came to be prized in senjafuda design, just as it was in other areas of early modern popular culture.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll093" width="100" %}

On this page are two depictions of senjafuda exchange meetings. The one above depicts a meeting taking place on April 10, 1842. The illustration is by [Utagawa Hiroshige](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hiroshige) 歌川広重 (1797-1858), one of the most famous and influential of woodblock print artists. The scene would have been held at a restaurant (restaurants often had large rooms on upper floors that could be rented out for parties), and teacups and teapots can be seen here and there on the floor; the blue background at top shows that sliding doors have been opened to the outside. Hanging from the lintel are handwritten banners; one identifies the ren attending the gathering, and the other says (ironically) “graffiti strictly forbidden.” Some participants are quietly exchanging slips, while others are clamoring energetically to claim ones they particularly want; a group of men in the bottom right corner are peacefully perusing slips that have been pasted into scrapbooks. This slip captures a noisy, fun atmosphere that goes a long way toward explaining the popularity of this activity.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll092" width="100" %}

The second depiction of an exchange meeting (above) is actually the left four chō of an eight-chō print (the full piece is reproduced in Sekioka 1983).[1] The print depicts an exchange meeting that took place on October 15, 1861; the illustration is by [Utagawa Hiroshige II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hiroshige_II) (1826-69), pupil of the first Hiroshige. As on the earlier print, the artist has added circles labeling many of the participants. Note that women are depicted as being among the participants.

##### References
[1] Sekioka Senrei 関岡扇令, ed. *Edo korekushon: Senjafuda 江戸コレクション　千社札*. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1983.

## Collecting and Appreciating
Play is key to understanding the way yōkai are used in senjafuda. Beauty, a pleasing design rendered with fine workmanship, was of course important to senjafuda, just as it was in woodblock prints. But, again like woodblock prints, senjafuda designs were full of creative references to other cultural phenomena: poems, plays, fashions, books, historical events, customs, tourist attractions, legends, and many other artifacts of material or narrative culture. 

Yōkai, for example, feature in senjafuda both because they were popular and attractive motifs in their own right and also because they allowed artists and collectors to make witty references to well-known stories, plays, works of art, or other phenomena that a viewer of the time might be expected to recognize. We might think of senjafuda as the early modern woodblock-printed equivalent of internet memes. And just like internet memes, senjafuda can be difficult to fully understand for someone removed from the context of their initial creation.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll038" width="100" %}

The slip above is an example of the multilayered referentiality and puzzle-like playfulness that senjafuda typically contain. It’s one of a series of slips presenting imagined textile patterns, three per 2-chō slip. Each of these patterns contains some sort of pun or complicated reference, some of which are explained by the name given to the pattern, others of which are explained (elliptically) by written commentary next to the design. Let’s start with the textile pattern on the top right, the most relevant to our yōkai-centered project. It shows a repeating pattern of a stick puppet of a fox in anthropomorphized form (perhaps the result of shape-shifting), with a smaller puppet of a horse on its hand. The title of this pattern, “Souvenir of Ōji,” tips us off that this is meant to represent a toy one might buy at the [Ōji Inari Shrine](http://www.visiting-japan.com/en/articles/tokyo/e13ki-oji-inari.htm), and indeed [stick puppets of foxes are one type of souvenir sold there](https://blog.goo.ne.jp/imadoki3/e/a457694ee6b67b3d8feb0af84d09b2c6). But why the horse puppet? That’s explained in the caption beneath the textile: “Not quite putting a fox on a horse’s back, instead this is the start of the First Horse observances.” The problem is, this explanation itself is a puzzle. The first part is a reference to a proverbial expression, “setting a fox on a horse’s back,” which describes something precarious, unstable, or unreliable. This isn’t quite that, of course, because rather than a fox on a horse’s back we see a horse on a fox’s hand. The second part of the explanation refers to the “first horse” festival, the tradition of making a pilgrimage to an Inari shrine on the first Day of the Horse (as designated by the [Chinese zodiac cycle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_zodiac)) in the second month of the year. Here the horse is being represented literally. The whole image, then, is a multilayered reference to the Ōji Inari shrine, annual observances at all Inari shrines, the kinds of souvenirs one might buy there, the shape-shifting abilities of the foxes that serve Inari, and an old proverb. It’s a handsome textile design, too.

The design on the top left isn’t quite as complicated. The repeated motif is a silhouette of a quiver with arrows sticking out of it. The design is named “Daikyūgata,” which could be interpreted as meaning “longbow pattern” (with bow being metonymic for arrows and quiver). The caption on the left says it “came from a Rikyūgata,” or [“Rikyū shape,” which was a kind of ornamental comb](https://www.bonhams.com/auctions/24681/lot/64/): crescent-shaped, with square ends. There’s a verbal pun with Rikyūgata twisted into Daikyūgata, matched with a visual pun, a quiver-and-arrows meant to resemble an ornamental comb. The caption even contains a little bit of wordplay in its own right: saying the pattern "came from a Rikyūgata" can be interpreted as meaning, not only that the shape of the quiver is reminiscent of a comb, but also, perhaps, that we should imagine the arrows actually sticking out of a comb.

The third design is even simpler. It shows cute little mice, and it’s called “Small Mouse Crest,” or *nezumi komon*. Where’s the joke? *Nezumi komon* is part of the title of a famous kabuki play from 1858: [*Nezumi komon haru no shingata*](https://www.kabuki21.com/nezumi_kozo.php), or [*The Small Mouse Crest: A New Pattern for Spring*](https://www.kabuki21.com/nezumi_kozo.php). The play is better known as *Nezumi Kozō*, or *The Mouse Kid*, the nickname of the outlaw hero it centers on, a kind of Robin Hood figure who aided the common folk. Viewers who knew the original title of the play would see in this pattern a literal rendering of the play's title, and therefore a reference to a swashbuckling rogue, as well as cute little mice. 

There’s one more reference to unpack here. The entire series is quite possibly a reference to a well known picture book from 1784 called [*Tanagui awase*](https://www.nijl.ac.jp/search-find/articles/gallery/200611.html), or [*The Hand-Towel Contest*](https://www.nijl.ac.jp/search-find/articles/gallery/200611.html). It purports to chronicle a party at which various authors, illustrators, courtesans, and other luminaries of the Floating World each displayed hand towels whose original designs made just the kind of complicated, playful, and elegant references found in the textile designs we’ve been discussing. It’s unclear whether such a party actually took place; perhaps, like the textile designs, the hand-towel patterns only ever existed as illustrations. In any case, the book has been celebrated ever since as a classic example of Floating World chic. Our undated series of textile designs is acknowledging its inspiration, while adapting its ideas to new jokes and a new format: the senjafuda series.

## Nostalgia
The previous sections explain essentially the way senjafuda have been made and used from the early 19th century right up to the present day. That is, they were and are privately published miniature works of art, commissioned by collectors but drawn and printed by specialists in the craft of woodblock printing. One more key change happened in senjafuda between the early modern period and today, however: they became an expression of nostalgia.

Senjafuda exchange and collecting continued to grow in popularity over the course of the 19th century, despite or perhaps in some ways because of the immense transformations Japanese society was undergoing in this era. The Meiji Period (1868-1912) was, as any student of Japanese history knows, the period when everything changed, as the country scrambled to modernize after two centuries or more of relative isolation during which the West experienced an industrial revolution that left Japan far behind. Government, education, industry, defense, and many more aspects of national life were reorganized in ways inspired by (or in reaction to) Western colonial powers. The way people dressed and groomed themselves, the kinds of houses they lived in and buildings they worked in, even the language they spoke changed drastically and swiftly.

These changes were accompanied by intense and long-lasting debates over what was happening. The net effect of the changes often seemed to be that Japan was coming to look more and more like the West, or parts of it; some people celebrated this, while others regretted it. Debates over modernization were also, to some extent, debates over Westernization. And in these debates, representations of the past, particularly the recent past of the late 18th and early 19th centuries, were employed as critiques of where Japan now found itself and where it seemed to be going.

Senjafuda from the early and middle parts of the 19th century use early modern artistic techniques and motifs because that was the state of the art. By the end of the 19th century, though, woodblock printing was no longer the state of the art for publishing, having been largely crowded out by movable type and photography, among other technologies. But senjafuda continued—and continue today—to be made by the older methods. Similarly, while one can find example of modern motifs (Western clothing, for example) or design sensibilities in senjafuda, by and large the aesthetic has continued to be that of the early and middle 19th century.

In other words, while the rest of Japanese life changed, senjafuda culture decided to remain as true as it could to the way things used to be—or the way modern people imagine the way things used to be. While the full dimensions of this reaction are too complex to be explored here, it’s fair to say this is a nostalgic, even antiquarian art form, and has been since at least the early 20th century. Modern senjafuda self-consciously preserve and perpetuate the aesthetics, technologies, and most importantly the subject matter of the early modern era.

Most of the images in this digitial exhibition date from a period spanning the end of the 19th and the first three decades of the 20th century. A few date from as early as the mid-19th century, and a few date from the post-World War II period. In all but the earliest of these images, what we’re seeing is conditioned by this desire to preserve the past. This is why yōkai are such a perfect match for senjafuda, because yōkai are also dependent on the visual culture of the early modern period. Pictures of shape-shifting foxes or tengu, demons or Shōki the demon-queller, are almost always doubling as representations of the Traditional Past. So are senjafuda.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll196" width="100" %}

The pair of slips above exemplifies the nostalgia inherent in most modern senjafuda, while revealing their status as products of the modern era. In terms of form, these are two separate slips, but several duplicates of this set are held by the JSMA and none of them have been cut apart, suggesting that they were understood to be related images despite no formal connection. And when one reads the text on each, the relationship becomes clear. The slip on the left depicts Shōki (explained in more detail elsewhere) in bright red. The red writing at the bottom of the slip not only shows Shōki’s name on a wooden plaque, it informs us that this is the Kanda Festival float sponsored by the Tachō 2-chōme neighborhood of Kanda. The daimei, rendered in black, reads Isetatsu. There’s no date, but they’re part of the Starr collection, so can’t be any later than 1933.

Isetatsu was the daimei of a woodblock printer in Kanda who did business under the name Kikujudō. Founded in 1864, [Kikujudō's shop survives today](https://www.isetatsu.com/) and still specializes in printed matter with Edo-esque motifs. The slip on the right is an advertisement for Kikujudō’s products, listing various kinds of paper including chiyogami (patterned papers of the type used in origami and other crafts—Isetatsu’s specialty today), handheld fans of both folding and non-folding varieties (both made of paper attached to wooden frames), paper napkins, standing screens, calendars, paper toys, and woodblock printing services, as well as nishikie (full-color woodblock-printed art). The address of the shop is given at bottom left (Kanda Tachō 2-20) along with a telephone number (Kanda-1950).

Together the two slips speak volumes about the relationship between past and present in senjafuda culture. The slip on the left contains virtually nothing that marks it as a product of the 1920s or 1930s. The slip on the right, however, is a frank advertisement for a modern business, complete with the latest in contact information. The traditional flavor of the slip on the left functions as further advertisement for a shop that was already specializing in old-fashioned paper and printing methods: it was just good marketing for Isetatsu/Kikujudō to present itself as upholding traditional culture in the form of the Kanda Festival and its associated iconography. There’s even a bit of advertising/nostalgia-marketing involved in the fact that the Shōki float is rendered in red. As discussed elsewhere on this site, Shōki was a common motif in red-printed hōsōe 疱瘡絵, “smallpox pictures,” where the combination of red pigment and fierce motif was traditionally held to ward off smallpox in an era before modern medicine. Smallpox pictures, although not listed among Kikujudō’s wares on the right, would have been something an early modern printer sold. This further nod to tradition both reminded the viewer that Isetatsu was a printer and bolstered Isetatsu’s preservationist brand—something that, perhaps ironically for a contemporary viewer, only has meaning in a modern context.

<!-- {% if page.credits == true %}{% include cb/credits.html %}{% endif %} -->
