---
title: World of Yōkai
layout: world-of-yōkai
permalink: /world-of-yōkai.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: true
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Yōkai, Collectively; Yōkai, Individually" %}

What are yōkai? This can be answered easily—but it can also be answered hardly, or maybe it can hardly be answered!

The easy answer is that “yōkai” is simply a Japanese word for ghosts and monsters. The slightly less easy, but still pretty easy, answer—and the one that we’re using as a definition throughout this digital exhibition—is that yōkai are Japanese ghosts and monsters as imagined in early modern Japan. This is important to keep in mind, because most of the senjafuda featured on these pages were actually made in the modern era—the early 20th century—but they’re depicting yōkai in ways that were codified a hundred or more years earlier. 

Beyond that, yōkai are notoriously hard to define. The difficulty begins with the term yōkai 妖怪 itself. It consists of two characters that both basically mean “strange,” but with different overtones. The first can also be thought of as meaning “enchanting,” with both the magical and the charismatic nuances of that word. The second can be thought of as meaning “mysterious” or even “scary.” As words for a thing they’re pretty vague, and together they’re just doubling down on the vagueness: “that which is strange in sort of mystical ways” is about the sense of it. 

Colloquially, of course, the term has come to mean a fairly specific thing (ghosts and monsters), but only comparatively recently has it become the preferred term for that thing. Historically, and even today, other words have been and are used for (almost?) the same thing: ayakashi, bakemono, mononoke. Scholarly and popular usage seem to have settled on yōkai as the basic descriptor now, but you’ll still encounter these other words. There's also disagreement about what belongs to the category of yōkai and what deserves its own, or a different, category. Ghosts and oni (demons/ogres) are two examples: some people feel they're yōkai, other people argue that they're not. On this site we're taking an inclusive approach, so ghosts and oni are in.

Ghosts and monsters of one kind or another have been present in Japan for a long time—as is probably true of most cultures, Japan’s earliest myths are populated with creatures that, for a later reader, defy belief, or perhaps invite it. As continental learning entered Japan it brought with it stories of more fantastic creatures connected with Buddhism, or with ancient Chinese legends. Many of these older monsters live on today in the popular imagination—tengu and foxes are two examples. Stories of those and other supernatural manifestations were mainstays of fiction and theater throughout the medieval period.

Yōkai as popularly conceived today certainly include creatures that can be traced back to the beginnings of Japanese history. But for the most part the way they’re conceived of—the way they’re visualized—is based on imagery that was codified in the Edo Period (ca. 1600-1868). This is a period that historians often call the Early Modern period, because in this period Japan began to develop institutions and attitudes that, while not completely modern as most people understand the term, were obvious breaks with the past in a way that anticipated or perhaps even led to modernity.

Among the things that make the Edo Period early modern is the emergence of a publishing industry. While most books before this period had been handmade for circulation among a small population of literate elites, beginning in the 17th century woodblock printing technology was utilized to mass produce books for sale or rental to an ever-widening audience of literate commoners. A publishing industry took shape, and with it what we can now recognize as a popular culture—i.e., a culture whose products were supported by broad-based commercial sales rather than elite patronage. This popular culture—often known then and now as the Floating World (ukiyo 浮世), or the culture thereof—was lived in many places, including theaters, brothel quarters, and Buddhist temple grounds (which often hosted carnival-like collections of shops and attractions). It also played out on the printed page, in popular fiction, comic books, and full-color prints—ukiyo-e, or “pictures of the Floating World.” If you’ve read the “World of senjafuda” section of this site you’ll recognize that senjafuda, or votive slips, can be seen as products of this Floating World culture, born of religious observance that doubled as play, and perpetuated through the woodblock printing industry. 

Ghosts and monsters were mainstays of early modern popular culture. They featured in popular fiction, comic books, kabuki plays, and ukiyo-e. So popular were depictions of yōkai in the early modern period, and so creative were those depictions, that they have indelibly colored later generations’ perceptions of these monsters. This means that when you see yōkai today, they tend to be depicted in ways, and even wearing costumes, that date to the early modern period. This is why it’s best to think of yōkai as “traditional” (we’ll just say early modern) Japanese ghosts and monsters. Godzilla is Japanese, but it’s a modern creation associated with science—not a yōkai. 

That means that there’s a certain amount of nostalgia bound up with the imagination of yōkai. In fact, the most celebrated modern revivalists of yōkai stories—folklorist Yanagita Kunio 柳田国男 (1875-1962) and mangaka Mizuki Shigeru 水木しげる (1922-2015) among them—have been fairly explicit about their goal of recording or perpetuating vanishing ways of life. Yōkai, for thinkers like these, embody values or beliefs that are threatened by modernity; thus, celebrating yōkai and perpetuating them in their early modern forms (i.e., just before modernity began to threaten them) is a way of critiquing or even resisting contemporary life. Again, if you’ve read the “World of senjafuda” section, you’ll see how much yōkai have in common with senjafuda culture: both are embodiments of a powerful nostalgia for the way things used to be, or more precisely the way we now imagine things used to be. 

In the rest of the pages that make up this section, “The world of yōkai,” we’ll explore depictions of yōkai in senjafuda as a way of learning more about these creatures and how they were depicted in early modern (and modern) popular culture. In the “Yōkai, collectively” section we’ll look at several “group portraits” of yōkai, depictions of them in groups or in series that gesture toward a comprehensive view of ghosts and monsters. In the “Yōkai, individually” section we’ll go in depth with a select few yōkai to explore the variety of ways in which they’re depicted in senjafuda. 

## Yōkai, Collectively
Influential yōkai scholar Michael Dylan Foster uses the images of “pandemonium” and “parade” in his discussion of historical depictions of yōkai. He derives both of these images from a classic medieval illustrated scroll known as the Hyakki yagyō emaki 百鬼夜行絵巻, or “Picture Scroll of the Night Parade of a Hundred Demons.” This scroll—actually there are many variants, so maybe we should say “these scrolls”—depict the old belief that on certain nights, monsters would parade through the streets of the city. For citizens, no doubt this was a terrifying prospect, but for artists it was an opportunity to capitalize on the format of the picture scroll (with its seemingly limitless horizontal expanse) to show a dizzying variety of monsters filing past the viewer in what seems, paradoxically, like an orderly procession.

Foster notes that in the “Night Parade” scrolls we can identify tendencies that surface again and again in depictions of yōkai: a tendency toward unrestrained imagination on the one hand, and a countervailing tendency toward neat categorization and presentation on the other. As Foster writes, the imagination of yōkai is always veering “between a frightening, chaotic pandemonium and a light-hearted, well-ordered parade.”[1]

The diptych above nicely captures the idea of pandemonium, in both a literal and a figurative sense. It's by Utagawa Sadashige 歌川貞重, who changed his name to Utagawa Kuniteru I 歌川国輝 in ca. 1847 (which places this print in the early or mid-1840s). Entitled Heroes Clowning Around on a Tour of Hell (Eiyū dōke jigoku meguri 英雄道外地獄廻), it shows a number of famous heroes from history and legend in, as the title suggests, hell. True to form, the heroes have conquered the place, turning the tables on King Enma and his oni servants. The composition shows a number of humorous vignettes, many of them reversals of what one would expect from a hell scene. In the bottom left we see several heroes manhandling King Enma himself, forcing him to look into his sin-revealing mirror (it says "heart"). In the top left a group of heroes is avidly watching a red demon and a yellow demon put on a display of wrestling; more demons look on glumly, as if afraid they're next. In the top right Asahina Yoshihide is being waited on hand and foot by demon attendants. Meanwhile, in the bottom right, heroes administer to demons some of the same punishments those demons are famed for meting out to sinners: boiling in a cauldron and being pounded in a giant mortar. The image quite literally shows pandemonium (all, or in this case just a lot of, demons), but on a figurative level it captures the wildness of the concept through the anarchic comic reversal of torturing demon torturers.

Foster’s concepts of pandemonium and parade help us understand the way yōkai are depicted in senjafuda, particularly in series or large-scale slips that show multiple yōkai. Renfuda, series of senjafuda planned and executed collectively by a club of aficionados, turn out to be a perfect format for presenting yōkai as discrete, categorizable phenomena—the parade idea. At the same time, even the most catalog-like depictions of yōkai are destabilized by excess: a superabundance of humor, imagination, or grotesquerie.

Foster bases his concept of parade specifically on the legendary hyakki yagyō, but yōkai legends include at least one other kind of parade: the fox wedding procession. When rain falls from a clear sky—something any child recognizes as spooky weather—legend has it that it means shape-shifting foxes are getting married. Film buffs may recall that Kurosawa Akira’s last film, Yume (Dreams), includes an appropriately eerie dramatization of a fox wedding procession. The first slip below shows just such a parade in its lower register, in enchantingly sketchy brushwork.

The second, third, and fourth slips above show yōkai being used in a real-life parade, the Kanda Myōjin Shrine Festival procession. Kanda's was one of Edo’s biggest festivals, and featured large floats topped with mannequins depicting figures from myth and legend. Many senjafuda groups were and are also involved in supporting the shrine and its festival, and depictions of the festival’s floats (each sponsored and maintained by a specific neighborhood) are common in both the Starr and Shōbundō collections.

The second and third slips above are credited to Utashige, or Utagawa Hiroshige 歌川広重 (1797-1858), one of the most famous and influential of woodblock print artists, suggesting that they date to the mid-19th century (see Exchanging for more of Hiroshige's work). The second shows the god Inari and one of his fox servants. The third shows the god Wake-ikazuchi no kami, a thunder god worshiped at the Kamo Shrine in Kyoto, as depicted in the noh play Kamo.

The final slip shows, on the left, the Kanda Festival float depicting Shōki. For further details on this slip see the “Nostalgia” page.

Foster uses the idea of parade to express the way many depictions of yōkai try to present them in an orderly fashion, with the suggestion that controlling the supernatural in this way allows us to approach it with delight rather than horror. These depictions of yōkai (and gods—the line between them is often thin) as used in an actual parade take that idea quite literally, as the celebratory atmosphere of the festival balances out or simply overwhelms any potential fear these creatures might inspire.

The following pages will explore collective depictions of yōkai in senjafuda along with similar items from the collection of the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art.

##### Night Parade of a Hundred Demons
Anecdotal accounts of demons and monsters parading through the streets of Kyoto at night can be found in sources as far back as the early 12th century, but the modern visual imagination of this phenomenon is generally traced to a painting scroll in the collection of the temple of Daitokuji. This so-called Daitokuji Shinjuan scroll is traditionally attributed to Tosa Mitsunobu (1434-1525) and is known as the Hyakki yagyō emaki. It may have been based on an earlier model, now lost, and scholars have used other early depictions of the night parade to speculate as to what this earlier model might have looked like. Nevertheless most later depictions seem to have been made with the Daitoku Shinjuan scroll in mind. Michael Dylan Foster discusses the Daitoku Shinjuan scroll in The Book of Yōkai, pp. 45-6.[1]

And there were a lot of later depictions. Many scrolls were made during the Edo Period, and the imagery they contained also made its way into woodblock printed materials. This is, of course, the period when the modern conception of yōkai took shape, but it’s worth noting that the hyakki yagyō illustrations seem to have been treated as a special subset of yōkai. The title of these works refers, of course, to demons (oni 鬼), but while a few orthodox-looking demons appear in the Daitoku Shinjuan and other versions, many of the monsters that populate these scrolls are tsukumogami 付喪神, everyday objects that have gained sentience, sprouted limbs, and taken to frolicking with the demons. Other denizens of these scrolls don’t seem to have stable identities beyond these scrolls, but are nonetheless recognizable as hyakki yagyō monsters due to their specifically medieval costumes. (So distinctive are the monsters from this genre of illustration that some people argue they shouldn’t be considered yōkai at all, but a separate category; since we’re using the term yōkai so inclusively for this digital exhibition we won’t insist on a distinction.)

Many excellent examples of the later scrolls have been reproduced and annotated (in Japanese) in the catalog for a special exhibit at the Mitsui Memorial Museum in 2013.[2] Another Edo-period scroll has been digitized and made accessible online by the Hyogo Prefectural Museum. Note how the artist has utilized the horizontal scroll format to delightful effect: the viewer is treated to a continuously unrolling panorama of monsters. The perfect fit between parade motif and picture scroll is no doubt partly responsible for the many versions of this theme.

The renfuda format also has obvious potential for depicting processions—just think of the frequent depictions of Kanda parade floats discussed elsewhere. So it’s no surprise that the hyakki yagyō motif shows up. The UO collections contain five one-chō slips that are clearly connected with this theme. Four are obviously from the same series, which raises the possibility that it might have been a complete senjafuda “scroll” of the night parade. The other seems to come from a different series.

The first slip below depicts a red-skinned demon in a courtier’s hat, running or leaping toward the left. He carries a spear on his shoulder. This figure is a standard feature of hyakki yagyō scrolls, and in fact the writing in the ball of flame above him says “hyakki yagyō.” The next four slips also depict figures identifiable from hyakki yagyō scrolls. The figure carrying the ensign with red streamers is probably a monster-fied shoe (as indicated by the black, blue, and yellow shoe tied to its neck). The blue-bodied monster with what looks like a red-handled brush for a head is a monster-fied hossu (used by Buddhist clerics to shoo flies); the same slip shows a woman with a coiled snake for a head, a less frequent feature of hyakki yagyō scrolls. The red, white, and blue streamers attached to a pole (carried by the last demon) are a heihaku, a ceremonial offering used in Shintō rituals. The final slip shows two animated musical instruments: a biwa 琵琶 and a koto 琴.

Some of the best known adaptations were made in the Meiji period by Kawanabe Kyōsai 河鍋暁斎 (1831-89), a painter and print designer particularly known for his fine touch with the grotesque. Kyōsai seems to have done just about every kind of work an artist of his era could do; see the Enma section for examples of how Kyōsai’s art showed up in senjafuda.

One of Kyōsai’s most fascinating creations was a woodblock-printed book called Kyōsai’s Illustrated Account of a Hundred Demons (Kyōsai hyakki gadan 暁斎百鬼画談), published in 1889, just before Kyōsai’s death. If the Night Parade of a Hundred Demons motif is tailor-made for the scroll format, what is the artist to do if he’s working for book publication? Kyōsai’s solution was to design this as an accordion book: when closed it looks almost like any other book (and can thus be stored alongside other modern books—convenient for those who don’t have a scroll-chest handy), but when unfolded it allows the reader to experience the continuous horizontal format of a scroll. The Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art’s copy of this work may be viewed below.  The copy in the Gerhard Pulverer Collection of the Freer Gallery of Art is also available for viewing online, and makes for an interesting comparison. 

It provides fascinating context for the hyakki yagyō senjafuda presented above. For one thing, all the figures except the snake-headed woman can be found in Kyōsai’s book. For another, it allows us to place the senjafuda in context as fellow woodblock-printed adaptations of this medieval motif, taking their subject out of the hand-painted world of the scroll and introducing them to the mass-produced world of the modern book, using the techniques of ukiyo-e.

Kyōsai’s book simulates a scroll not just in its horizontal format: it begins and ends with depictions of rolled-up paper, the ends of an unrolled scroll. Note that this trick is also used in the senjafuda “hell scroll” discussed elsewhere on this site. Then the viewer enters a parlor on a rainy night, where a group of people are telling scary stories to each other by candlelight. Food and drink and tobacco are in evidence, marking this as an improvised party. The mist descending over the man adjusting the lamp marks a transition, presumably, into the world of the story being told around the brazier. From this point on we’re in the world of the hyakki yagyō—but it begins with a twist. We first encounter an army of animated skeletons charging into battle. We soon see that their opponents are a horde of nearly indescribable monsters—demons, clearly. From then until nearly the end of the scroll we encounter a recognizable assortment of hyakki yagyō monsters. Note that Kyōsai has reversed the normal movement of the hyakki yagyō scroll—rather than following the procession as it moves to the left, the viewer encounters the procession head-on, as it moves to the right. Coupled with the opening battle scene, this suggests we’re moving through an onrushing horde of demonic reinforcements. The onslaught is only brought to an end by the red sun at the end of the “scroll,” rising to scatter the parade; the sun’s role as savior here may remind us of the way the senjafuda “hell scroll” ends with a bodhisattva’s intervention.

Yasumura Toshinobu has written a full commentary (in Japanese) on Kyōsai's book.[3]

Tsukumogami are often shown in a hyakki yagyō context, and perhaps for that reason they often have a medieval feel to them rather than a contemporary (i.e., early modern). That is, the objects shown are often those more familiar to medieval viewers than those in Edo, and their clothing or accoutrements are more appropriate to the 12th or 15th century than the 18th or 19th.

Of course, tsukumogami aren’t limited to night parades—Noriko Reider has discussed the broader category of tsukumogami stories and illustrations in the medieval period.[4] And they often appear in early modern yōkai stories and illustrations, too—we’ll see some examples in the boardgame and senjafuda yōkai series sections of this site. Below are some slips that focus exclusively on tsukumogami.

The first four slips below are from a thirty-slip series contained in the Shōbundō Collection. The entire series focuses on tsukumogami, and like these the objects that have become animated are ones that an early modern viewer would still have been familiar with from everyday life. This “modern” sense is complicated, however, by the fact that these slips were made in the early 1950s—they’re expressing a sense of nostalgia for a period when these objects, which by the 1950s might have seemed old-fashioned, still felt new. The art style, however, seems to owe as much to manga as to ukiyo-e, lending these a touch of mid-century modernity to go with the nostalgia. (Of course, in the early 21st century “mid-century modern” is itself an object of nostalgia…)

From left we have: a pair of teacups that together make a set of eyes; a teapot with legs and face; a ladle; a kettle; a shamisen 三味線 holding a plectrum and a songbook; a folding fan wielding itself; and a large mortar and pestle of the type used to make mochi. Note that each pair of slips goes together: the teapot naturally inclines toward the teacups, the ladle would be used to scoop water from the kettle into a teapot, a shamisen player would also have carried a fan (or the shamisen might be used to accompany a second performer who uses a fan as a prop), and the pestle of course is used with the mortar. The viewer might further notice that the kettle’s legs are furry and it has a tail, too; this tells us that it’s not a tsukumogami proper, but a shape-shifting tanuki (see a more orthodox depiction of this tanuki-kettle motif on the sugoroku board).

The final slip is from the Starr Collection and depicts a smaller pestle; there was a vogue for pestle tsukumogami with wings in the 19th century (see also the pestle on the sugoroku board).

The Shōbundō Collection contains another fascinating series that presents yōkai in what seems to be a type of parade (seen above). It consists of six 4-chō slips, each of which has two illustrated panels. Each panel shows one yōkai in silhouette, seen through a backlit paper door. Two of these slips are above. They date from the late 1960s, but the motifs are reminiscent of the vogue for "shadow pictures" (kage-e) in the mid-19th century. Most of the yōkai in this series are presented in profile (perhaps a requirement of the silhouette) and in movement; together they create the illusion of an indoor outbreak of monsters. Perhaps staying behind closed shutters was no protection from the night parade after all.

##### A Boardgame
Here we digress from senjafuda to look at another kind of woodblock-printed yōkai from the mid-19th century: a sugoroku gameboard.

Sugoroku—which may literally be translated as “double sixes”—is the name for two not-really-related kinds of board games played in premodern Japan. The word first applied to the game known in English as backgammon, which is played with a pair of dice (thus the name). The word also came to refer to board games similar to the snakes-and-ladders type or simple race-type games familiar today. The rules for the latter were simple, but the “boards” themselves came in a dizzying variety of arrangements, and were not in fact boards but paper on which pictorial designs were printed. These were illustrated, printed, and sold by some of the same artists and craftsmen responsible for ukiyo, illustrated books, and, yes, senjafuda.

As games sugoroku boards have little to offer modern players, but as works of visual art they can often be quite spectacular. In fact, many of the boards seem to have been designed not for actual play but for appreciation as visual art that incorporates gameplay ideas and forms into its visual scheme—rather like later senjafuda, meant not for pasting but for exchange and appreciation. Like senjafuda, sugoroku boards have not attracted the same kind of attention from scholars and collectors that their ukiyo-e cousins have; one of the few discussions of them in English is in Rebecca Salter’s Japanese Popular Prints (pp. 164-81).[1] The Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art has several sugoroku boards, however, including the classic piece of yōkai art below. (For those interested in comparisons, another copy may be viewed in the National Diet Library's Digital Collections.)

Entitled Once-Upon-A-Time Monsters Sugoroku (Mukashibanashi bakemono sugoroku 百種怪談妖物雙六), this board was illustrated by Utagawa Yoshikazu 歌川芳員 (n.d.) and published in 1858. As the title reflects, the game design combines yōkai with a storytelling motif. The start square is the large square in the center of the bottom row (it says “start” or furidashi), which depicts a group of children telling scary stories by lamplight. The rest of the squares depict the monsters inhabiting the children’s tales. Each square contains a list of six instructions. Players puts their markers down in the start square, and then take turns rolling a die, then following the instruction that corresponds to the number rolled. The instructions typically tell the player to jump to another yōkai’s square, although one can also lose a turn. Players move around the board, not in sequence, but at random according to the roll of the die, until somebody rolls a number that corresponds to an instruction to jump to the finish (agari) square, which is the large square in the center of the top row.

This game could be played, and judging from the well-worn condition of the JSMA’s copy, it probably was. At the same time it could be appreciated purely as a visual artifact, presenting twenty-five of the best-known yōkai in what appears to be an orderly fashion. A parade, if you will: this board exemplifies the tendency toward rational presentation that Foster identifies as the counterpoint to the pandemonium exhibited by the hyakki yagyō (which was, paradoxically, envisioned as a literal parade). But the order is illusory, not only because the yōkai don’t seem to be arranged according any particular logic, but mainly because gameplay will bring the player into contact with these yōkai in a different order every time, according to the roll of the die.

One of the peculiarities of this gameboard is that some of the yōkai are given names that don’t correspond to what are now their best-known appellations. Whether they correspond to tales that were well known in 1858 or whether they’re merely fanciful embroidery has yet to be determined.

For an identification of each yōkai on the gameboard, see below the image.

**The bottom row, left to right**
“The Mountain Man of Mount Myōkō.” A yamaotoko; a gigantic human living in remote mountainous areas.

“The Dog-God and White Child of Kōshū.” Kōshū was another name for Ōmi. An inugami or “dog-god” was thought to be the yōkai that resulted from certain arcane rituals; it could be used to possess or torment an enemy. Depictions of the inugami often give it a servant or sidekick known as a shirachigo or “white child”; these are usually drawn with human faces, but this one is drawn as a puppy.

Start square (discussed above)

“The Great Three-Eyed Priest of Asahina Pass.” Asahina Pass is in Kamakura. Priests are often monster-fied in yōkai culture, probably reflecting both the familiarity of the Buddhist priest in Edo life and the association of Buddhism with death in the period (since Buddhism had a legal monopoly on funeral rites). Three-eyed (mitsume) monsters were staples of the early modern imagination.

“The Snow Lady of Naka-no-Kawachi.” There are several locales known as Kawachi. The yōkai here labeled yuki jorō is more commonly known today as yuki onna (“snow woman”); she haunts snowy climes and combines both idealized feminine beauty and the treachery of a mountain snowstorm. She was popularized (in both Japan and the West) by Lafcadio Hearn’s story of the same name in Kwaidan (1904), and its subsequent adaptation in the film of the same name (1964) by Kobayashi Masaki.

**Second row from bottom, left to right**
“The Sea-Monk of the Genkai Sea.” The Genkai Sea (Genkai-nada) is an area of ocean off the northwest coast of Kyushu. The umibōzu or “sea-monk” is a well-known oceanic yōkai often pictured as a huge shadowy or black figure that wrecks ships.

“The Filth-Licker of Shedbottom Valley.” Sokokuradani is probably a made-up place name, so we’ve translated it literally as “Shedbottom Valley.” The location depicted is actually a public bath, and the filth-licker (akaname) is reaching excitedly for a wash-bucket in order to lick up the soap scum or dirt left behind in it.

“The Jealous Grudge.” An enigmatic image for a modern viewer, this depicts an old-fashioned wooden pillow, a snake, and a floating flame. Disembodied spirits were often depicted as floating flames, while medieval stories often saw snakes as the embodiment of female jealousy. The story of the monk Karukaya is typical: as a layperson, he kept both his wife and mistress in the same house, until one day he passed the room where both were sleeping and saw that their hair had turned to snakes fighting with each other. Realizing the torments of jealousy he was subjecting them to, he became a monk. Here the viewer might imagine that the snake and the flame are the embodiments of different women’s jealousy, and that they’re facing off here.

“Boat-Ghosts in the Leviathan Waves.” Boat-ghosts (funayūrei) are sometimes conceived of as a ghostly ship and sometimes as ghosts that emerge from the waves to attack a ship. Here we see the latter type. They’re holding ladles, with which they are said to pour water into a ship to sink it.

“The Forktailed Cat in the Rotting Temple.” Abandoned temples are frequently imagined to be the lair of ghosts and monsters, and here we have a nekomata or “forktailed cat” dancing wildly in one, a rag on its head. Cats of exceptionally advanced age were believed to develop forked tails and magical powers. Yōkai cats are often depicted as dancing in this spooky manner, as in Toriyama Sekien’s influential 1776 bestiary Gazu hyakki yagyō (The illustrated night parade of a hundred demons). Two more such cats are depicted in the finish square two rows above.

“The Kappa of Bandō Tarō.” Bandō is another term for the Kantō, or the region of eastern Japan surrounding what is now Tokyo; Bandō Tarō, or the “Firstborn of Bandō,” was a poetic name for the Tone River. Kappa are described elsewhere on this site; this particularly ferocious looking specimen appears to be extracting the internal organs of the child in his right hand. An additional inscription on this square instructs the player to “lose one turn because the water in your dish dries up.”

“The Angry Spirit of Sunamura.” Sunamura was a village near Edo famous, according to some sources, for pumpkins. The idea of a pumpkin yōkai, however, is most associated with the Yotsuya Kaidan story; in some versions, when Oiwa’s angry spirit (onryō) manifests her face in a burning lantern, her face also appears on some pumpkins growing nearby. Here the idea has (literally) taken on a life of its own, as the pumpkin vine is carrying its own head in its hands.

“The Echo.” A seemingly straightforward monsterfication of the echo phenomenon, the yamabiko doesn’t seem to have been represented in illustrations before the mid-Edo Period. Toriyama Sekien depicts it in a vaguely canine manner, no doubt inspiring Yoshikazu’s depiction here.

**Second row from top, left to right**
“The Pestle of Mortar Mountain.” We appear to be in a tsukumogami world here. The pestle (rengibō) appears to be a normal pestle that has sprouted wings and perhaps antennae. “Mortar Mountain” in the background is an overturned mortar.

“The Leerer at the Skylight.” This depiction of a shōkera is clearly indebted to Toriyama Sekien’s. The origins of the creature are obscure, but Sekien’s visualization of it, echoed here, is scary enough: a creepy crawler peering in through a skylight.

“The Morinji Kettle.” One of the most popular tanuki stories (Bunbuku chagama, or “The Lucky Teakettle”) involves a tanuki who turned himself into a teakettle. A number of variations on the tale exist, but most at some point involve the tanuki losing his concentration when placed over hot coals, so that his tail and legs pop out of the teakettle. Some version of the story associate it with the temple of Morinji in Gunma; that’s the version Toriyama Sekien illustrated, and that’s what Yoshikazu shows us here.

“The Oneleg of Heron Pool.” Undoubtedly one of the cutest yōkai is the umbrella monster (kasabake and variants thereof), sometimes also known as a “oneleg” (ippon-ashi). Usually depicted with comical eyes and protruding tongue and one leg (for obvious reasons). Like Tofu Boy, the umbrella monster seems to have existed mostly in illustrations, without any particular story attached to it. Perhaps it was conceived of as a kind of tsukumogami, or perhaps it was simply—then as now—an irresistibly funny idea for a yōkai.

“The Latheneck in the Old Chest.” Latheneck is our pet translation for rokurokubi, the enigmatic name of a familiar yōkai. A rokuro refers to either a potter’s lathe (in which case the name conjures up the way a potter might mysteriously lengthen the neck of a jar while turning the wheel) or the pulley used to draw water from a well (in which case the name suggests the sinuous length of the rope)—and other explanations have been given. In any case the yōkai has an extendable neck, allowing the head free rein to travel where it will (in some versions the head is detachable). Usually the rokurokubi is depicted as female, but Yoshikazu gives us a grizzled priest-like very similar to the mikoshi nyūdō in the row above.

“The One-Eye of Liar’s Moor.” Like the three-eyed monster, the “one-eye” (hitotsume) was a common figure in yōkai illustrations; often it was a boy like this. But this one also has attributes of the well known Tofu Boy (tōfu kozō), who was usually depicted with two eyes but sometimes conflated with the one-eye as here (both are further conflated with “big-headed boy,” ōatama kozō, whose appearance may be imagined). Neither are considered particularly harmful yōkai. Tofu Boy is usually pictured as he is here: appearing on a dark and rainy night, wearing a rain hat and carrying a tasty-looking block of tōfu on a tray. Occasionally he’s shown licking the tōfu with a preternaturally long tongue.

“Lantern Oiwa.” Oiwa is the protagonist of the classic kabuki ghost story Tōkaidō Yotsuya kaidan (The Tōkaidō Yotsuya horror), first performed in 1825 and a staple of Japanese horror ever since. A faithful daughter, wife, and mother, Oiwa is deceived, ridiculed, cheated on, dumped, poisoned, disfigured, and finally killed as a result of the machinations of her rogue of a husband Iemon. After her death she haunts Iemon spectacularly on her way to a revenge that has satisfied audiences for nearly two centuries. One of the most iconic moments in the story is when a large paper lantern bursts into flames, revealing Oiwa’s face leering at Iemon out of the blaze. Yoshikazu has foregone the fire here, but Oiwa’s ravaged features gaze forth with terrifying menace.

“The Belly-Drum of Tanpo Moor.” The “belly-drum” (haratsuzumi) is, of course, a tanuki happily doing his thing. The word here translated "moor"—hara 原—is a homonym for "belly"—hara 腹. This square contains an extra inscription instructing players to “lose one turn because you injure the skin of your belly.”

**Top row, left to right**
“The Devil Lurking in the Abandoned Temple.” This square depicts a nobusuma (written, as is often the case on this sugoroku board, with characters that suggest an alternative interpretation), and it’s a rare case of Yoshikazu departing from Sekien’s precedent. Sekien identifies the nobusuma as a flying squirrel (musasabi) and draws it accordingly, but Yoshikazu’s teacher, the influential Utagawa Kuniyoshi 歌川国芳 (1798-1861), had depicted the nobusuma as a fearsome batlike creature, and that’s what Yoshikazu gives us here.

“The Overlooker Initiate.” An “initiate” or nyūdō is someone who has “entered the Way,” or taken the first steps toward Buddhist priesthood but gone no farther; it was a common state for a retired man in premodern Japan. Since old things and priests were always fair game for monsterfication it’s no surprise that the nyūdō has a presence in yōkai lore. The “overlooker” or mikoshi nyūdō was one of the most popular of early modern yōkai. Originally it seems to have been simply a very tall priest-like figure that grew taller the more you looked at it, but it was also often depicted as having (like the rokurokubi) an extendable neck, and its name implies the ability to peer over your shoulder. Sekien depicted it peeking out from behind a stand of trees. Here the head almost fills the frame; the bulging flesh beneath the beard suggests the coils of an elongated neck.

“Monster Cat in the Old Palace.” This is the finish square. It refers to a scene from an 1827 play by the author of Yotsuya kaidan, Hitoritabi Tōkaidō gojūsantsugi (Traveling alone on the East Sea Road, All 53 Stages). In the scene in question a traveler stops for the night at an old temple, where he encounters an old woman who turns out to be a shape-shifting cat. After they fight, she flies away. Kuniyoshi’s ukiyo-e depictions of this scene (one in the British Museum, one in the Museum of Fine Arts Boston) became iconic yōkai images, featuring the old woman mid-transformation, dancing cats (drawn from Sekien’s model), and a huge cat head peeking in through holes in the blinds. Yoshikazu’s scene is clearly modeled after his teacher’s conception.

“A Golden-Furred Nine-Tailed Fox.” The nine-tailed fox (kyūbi no kitsune) was a figure of ancient Chinese and Japanese legend, where it often appeared as a villain. In Japan the most famous occurrence was in the story of Lady Tamamo, a courtesan favored by an emperor who was later revealed to be a nine-tailed fox preying upon him. When revealed, she fled and was eventually killed, her spirit becoming embedded in a “killing stone” (sesshōseki), fatal to any who came in contact with it, until a priest exorcised it. Unlike Inari foxes, nine-tailed foxes are generally depicted as red or golden.

“The Octopus Initiate of the Tosa Sea.” Just as the umibōzu isn’t really a priest, the tako nyūdō would seem to be an initiate in name only. Beyond that it’s just a giant octopus. That's monstrous enough, perhaps.

##### Matchbox Label Series
Frederick Starr had good academic reasons for getting interested in senjafuda, but he also seems to have been a collector by nature. The UO’s Starr holdings include a wide variety of printed and handwritten ephemera in addition to senjafuda, ranging from printed shrine and temple charms to handwritten price tags from purchases of rice. Some of these items demonstrate the overlap between collectors’ and hobbyists’ circles in early 20th century Japan.

One particularly interesting overlap seen in the Starr collection is between senjafuda collecting and matchbox label collecting. In an era when smoking was much more common than it is today, and before handheld lighters became widely available, many people carried boxes of matches in their pockets. The labels attached to these boxes were opportunities for bold experiments in graphic design (not to mention advertising), and so it’s not hard to understand why they attracted collectors. As miniature examples of graphic design and high-quality printing they have many of the same charms as senjafuda.

In the case of Japan, matchbox labels had an added significance. Matches were an important export industry in late 19th and early 20th century Japan, so while many early designs display somewhat traditional-looking motifs, others make bold use of modern design concepts. As a result, matchbox label collecting seems to have been associated more with a rapidly modernizing, eagerly forward-looking Japan than with the nostalgia that characterizes senjafuda collecting.[1]

The Starr collection contains a few dozen matchbox labels. Many of them contain the names of collectors’ organizations and other indications that they were specially commissioned as commemorative items. One example is the tengu mask label below, which says, “Osaka Match Aficionados Association, May 1926.” On the tengu’s nose is written “commemorating entry into the association,” presumably referring to Kibundō, the pseudonym written at the bottom of the label.

While most matchbox labels were made by modern printing processes, some were woodblock printed, and this appears to be the case with most in the Starr collection. Among them are the ten yōkai labels below. All contain the name Minami Kichijirō, a name that appears in many of the Starr labels, often with late-1920s dates. The presence of Minami’s name and no company or other information suggests that these, too, were privately commissioned.

The ghosts and monsters depicted on these labels are not identified, but they’re clearly influenced by Edo period depictions of yōkai such as the sugoroku board discussed elsewhere. Their format is reminiscent both of senjafuda and of another variety of woodblock-printed toy popular in the Edo period, iroha karuta. Karuta are discussed elsewhere on this site; here we’ll note that one variety of karuta, produced as late as the early 20th century, used yōkai as the visual motif. Karuta’s dimensions and proportions weren’t so different from those of matchbox labels, which may have played a part in the design of this series of labels.

**Discussion of individual yōkai in the matchbook labels**

From left to right:

A one-eyed boy holding a covered teacup. Visually quite similar to the “One-Eye of Liar’s Moor” on the sugoroku board, complete with lolling tongue. Since he holds a teacup instead of a tray of tofu we’d probably consider this a hitotsume kozō or one-eyed boy.

A woman with an elongated neck. Plainly a rokurokubi, and a much more orthodox depiction of one than the “Latheneck in the Old Chest” on the sugoroku board.

A woman dressed in white and a wisp of flame or red smoke. White robes, unkempt hair, and a body that trails off into nothingness where feet should be are all standard features of traditional depictions of yūrei or ghosts, and depictions of female ghosts were far more popular than those of male ghosts in late Edo and Meiji Japan. The flame, too, suggests a disembodied spirit (as in the “Jealous Grudge” on the sugoroku board).

A paper lantern with a human face appearing on it; a tear near the bottom of the lantern doubles as a mouth, and the flame inside is roaring forth like a tongue. This is a clear reference to the famous scene in Yotsuya kaidan where the ghost of Oiwa appears in a paper lantern that bursts into flames, a scene also depicted on the sugoroku board.

From left to right:

This looks like a closeup of a ghostly face, but the way the head dominates the frame suggests the artist is thinking of the ōkubi or “huge head,” an apparition depicted in Konjaku gazu zoku hyakki (Illustrations of a Hundred Demons Past and Present, Continued), Toriyama Sekien’s second bestiary. Sekien describes it as appearing on dark and rainy nights, and notes that “anything huge is scary.”

A hairy man with a fierce expression and hands held in a menacing pose. This yōkai is too generic to allow for sure identification, but it is somewhat reminiscent of depictions of the mikoshi nyūdō (including that on the sugoroku board); usually this yōkai is shown with neck extended, but not always.

The ghost of Kasane, almost as popular in 19th century theater as Oiwa; of particular note was the extended horror rakugo Shinkei Kasane-ga-fuchi (A True View of Kasane Pool) of 1859 by San’yūtei Enchō, in which a sickle is used as a murder weapon.

A three-eyed monster. Like the “Great Three-Eyed Priest of Asahina Pass,” this is an example of a mitsume. Interestingly, this specimen is probably also being presented as a priest: the item in its hand is probably the end of a conch shell (actually a "Triton’s trumpet"), used as a ritual musical instrument in some Buddhist sects.

From left to right:

Another female ghost, too generic to be identified with any particular story. The wooden posts in the background (also visible in the label depicting Oiwa as a lantern) are stupas marking graves.

An umibōzu very similar in appearance to the “Sea-Monk of the Genkai Sea” on the sugoroku board.

##### A Senjafuda Yōkai Series
Some of the renfuda sets in the UO collection come with labels, announcements, or other kinds of documentation setting out the theme of the set, the name of the group producing it, the date and perhaps even location of the exchange meeting for which it was being produced, and sometimes even the reason why this particular theme was chosen. Furthermore, the internal logic of the slips or evidence of careful arrangement in the scrapbooks sometimes suggests that the slips were intended to be viewed in a particular order. The “hell scroll” set discussed elsewhere is an example of a set of renfuda that contains all the information a scholar would like to see.

The set of senjafuda discussed on this page comes with none of that information. We don’t know when the set was made or why, how the group formulated its theme to themselves, what order we’re meant to view the slips in (if any), or even if this is all the slips originally made as part of the set. This is too bad, because it’s one of the most charming sets in the collection—and particularly intriguing from the point of view of yōkai. It’s obviously a collection of yōkai, presented (generally) one to a slip in the manner of the sugoroku gameboard and matchbox labels discussed elsewhere. Like them, then, it can be seen as part of the tendency to organize and (to an extent) rationalize presentations of yōkai (even if we don’t know what the original organizational scheme might have been).

A closer look, however, reveals that the yōkai presented here are much less orthodox than they appear at first glance. Not all of them can be identified with “known” yōkai, and even the ones that can be named are often presented with playful disregard for precedent. The neatness with which these monsters are framed for us disguises an anarchic, creative spirit that owes a great deal to the “pandemonium” of the hyakki yagyō.

Many, but not all, of the images here seem closely patterned on an untitled large format single-sheet print held in the Yumoto Koichi Collection.[1] The print has more images than are found in the UO's senjafuda series, while the UO series has one image (the first one discussed below) not found in the Yumoto print. The Yumoto Koichi Collection also contains a set of matchbox labels (many bearing the name Minami Kichijirō, like those in the Starr Collection) featuring many of the same designs as in this senjafuda series.[2] The exact relationship between the single-sheet print, the senjafuda, and the matchbox labels is unclear.

First slip: At first glance this is Tofu Boy, in a rendition very close to that on the sugoroku board. Oversize single eye, lolling tongue, tattered sedge hat, and a tray of tofu all support that identification—but then we notice the furry legs and tail. What we have here is a tanuki that has half shape-shifted into Tofu Boy—a yōkai pretending to be another yōkai. Is this a tanuki, like the one in “The Lucky Teapot” (discussed on the sugoroku page), losing his concentration? Incidentally, the Japanese expression roughly equivalent to the English “to tip one’s hand” is “to show one’s tail” (shippo o dasu 尻尾を出す), a reference to stories of foxes and tanuki inadvertently revealing their deception by letting their tails pop out.

Second slip: A huge paper lantern turning into a leering face should immediately put us in mind of Oiwa from Yotsuya kaidan (discussed on the sugoroku page and the matchbox labels page). No doubt most members of the ren would have made that connection too, but note that it’s not Oiwa’s villainous husband Iemon who’s being frightened here but a hapless priest. This combined with the lack of flames and the kind of ghostly or feminine elements usually found in representations of the Oiwa lantern scene suggest that this could also be a more generic monster lantern or obake chōchin sometimes found in yōkai collections. Toriyama Sekien’s fourth bestiary, Hyakki tsurezure bukuro (A hundred things in a bag of idleness, 1784), contains an early depiction of one under the name burabura (“dangly-dangly”).

Third slip: A female ghost holding a broken dish, rising from a wooden well along with flames. This is one of the few more-or-less orthodox depictions in this series: all the above attributes clearly mark this ghost as Okiku from the Sarayashiki (“Dish Manor”) legend. Like Oiwa and Kasane, Okiku has been the subject of endless stageplays, films, and other presentations; in its most basic outlines her story is that of a housemaid in a wealthy house who breaks an heirloom dish. The master of the house, enraged, kills her and throws her into a well, from which her ghost later emerges. The man being haunted here appears to be an innocent passerby; the two sticks on the ground next to him are probably clappers, suggesting that the man is a neighborhood watchman making his rounds. In Edo watchmen would call out fire safety reminders at night to the sound of clappers.

Fourth slip: A ghost with a sickle sticking out of her neck. Early 20th century viewers would have associated this imagery with the story of Kasane, as discussed on the matchbox labels page. This version of Kasane’s ghost towers over the men on the bridge in the foreground, however, which is a notable departure from most ghost stories. Here, too, the men seem to be unrelated to the ghost’s story, further underscoring how even the identifiable yōkai in this series are unmoored from their typical contexts, set free to haunt anybody and everybody.

First slip: The matchbox label may or may not have been an ōkubi, but this certainly is: a huge ghostly head appearing on a dark night. The mallet on the ground belongs to the small gong this victim is wearing around his neck, a common accoutrement of pilgrims (and of Ōtsue demons).

Second slip: The motif on this slip is similar to the one on the previous slip: a huge female face appearing to startle a man out of his wits. This face looks more demonic than ghostly, with coloring and features similar to a noh hannya mask, but where horns should be there are two more small faces. This may simply be a flight of fancy on the artist’s part—although, interestingly, the International Research Center for Japanese Studies’ database of yōkai legends (Japanese only) contains one entry for a sanmenkubi or “three-faced head,” which is described as a noh mask with angry, laughing, and crying faces. In addition, a 1788 kibyōshi (kind of an early modern comic book) called Bakemono chakutōchō (Monsters Reporting for Duty), shows a mitsumen uba or "three-faced wetnurse."[3] There it's a jokey pair with a one-eyed boy, which is usually how it's depicted today. This doesn't look like that, but the idea could have inspired this image.

Third slip: At first glance the long curly neck with a bulbous head at the end may fool the viewer into thinking this is a rokurokubi. But the hands near the head rule that out, and the head itself is anomalous, to say the least: not so much a hitotsume or one-eye as a head that’s all eye. To a modern viewer this creature is strangely reminiscent of yōkai manga artist Mizuki Shigeru’s character medama oyaji, or “Eyeball Dad,” but Mizuki didn’t invent him until the 1950s. No older yōkai has been identified that corresponds to this creature, but note that it’s emerging from a sake bottle. It might be intended as nothing more than the manifestation of a wicked hangover-in-the-making.

Fourth slip: An abnormally large red horse glares down at a fearful passerby. Although several known yōkai are associated with horses, none seem at all similar to this image. It may be intended to suggest the famed Red Hare Horse mentioned in Chinese historical tales: eight feet tall with a pure red coat. But again, the main point might be the sheer whimsical strangeness of the image—which extends to the rider, whose face is mysteriously hidden by his hat and whose limbs are contorted in what could be glee, drunkenness, or fear.

First and second slips: These both seem to depict umibōzu or sea-monks, popular yōkai that we’ve already encountered in both the sugoroku board and the matchbox labels. On both slips the yōkai fits the traditional depiction, being large and seemingly composed mostly of shadow. Indeed, we can see right through the eyeholes and mouths of these creatures to the “sky” in the background, a playful artistic touch that suggests three-dimensional human victims confronting no-dimensional antagonists.

Third slip: Despite the red skin and other indications of corporeality that contrast with the previous two slips, this too might be intended to suggest an umibōzu. Although most depictions of this yōkai show it as in the previous two slips, Bakemono chakutōchō imagines the umibōzu as a huge, scaly, finny, toothy creature, and shows it mauling and gnawing at a boat. That image doesn’t quite fit this one either, but it suggests the concept is fairly elastic. In any case, the way the monster has lifted the boat straight out of the water while keeping it perfectly level, rather than capsizing it, is both striking and a little funny.

Fourth slip: Here, too, the impact of the image is probably more important than any particular identification: a huge red arm coming out of the clouds to lift a man up by the ankle. But the red color suggests oni, and the combination of clouds and oni suggest a thunder god (discussed elsewhere). When thunder gods attack it’s usually with lightning rather than by hand, but that incongruity just adds to the surprise and humor of the image. It could also be a reference to the old concept of kamikakushi 神隠し, literally “hidden away by a god.” Traditionally this was a phenomenon associated with tengu, who were said to disappear children on occasion (of course the term also shows up in the original Japanese title of the Ghibli film known in English as Spirited Away). But the literal meaning of the term conjures up the image of a god snatching someone away, and the 1853 Kyōka hyaku monogatari (A hundred stories in comic verse), a compendium of yōkai illustrations combined with comic verse on corresponding themes, depicts a kamikakushi being perpetrated by an actual god. That god looks nothing like this one, but the artist may be imagining a thunder god “hiding” his victim away.[4]

These three slips depict three kinds of lamp monsters. All three are types of andon 行灯 or oil lamps primarily for indoor use. The first one shows a very human-looking foot sticking out of one of the paper panels, as well as a smiling face. The second shows two arms and one leg, as well as a face where a drawer for wicks or flint and steel would have been. The third is harder to parse: an entire body has sprung up from inside a cylindrical lamp; the head appears to be an oversized container for oil, with the wick-stand holding an eye. As animated objects these would probably have been considered tsukumogami, but to an Edo eye these lamps would have appeared modern, a notable contrast to the tsukumogami associated with hyakki yagyō illustrations. Of course, this set of senjafuda was made in the early 20th century, complicating our ideas of what would have been perceived as “modern” and or “old-fashioned.”

First and second slips: Architecture comes alive! In the first slip, the torii gate in front of a Shintō shrine attacks a priest—the end of its lower crosspiece has sprouted a grasping hand. The priest may or may not be aware of impending danger from above, however: he appears to be reacting instead to the stone lantern in front of him, whose pedestal has become an actual foot (look closely at the top—there might be a face there, too). In the second slip, a tea-ceremony hut has become the head of a giant red-robed monster.

Third slip: This and the tanuki Tofu Boy are the only two-chō slips in this series, suggesting they might have been meant to begin and end the group (although that’s only a guess). In any case, this is a fitting finish, as it’s the only slip to show more than one yōkai, suggesting yōkai energy bursting through any lingering sense of order or restraint. Here a pair of palanquin bearers are startled into dropping their cargo and spilling its occupant when they’re confronted by three looming monsters. On the left there’s yet another animated lantern. In the center we have a gargantuan statue of the bodhisattva Jizō—his round white eyes suggest he has come to life. And on the right we might have a mikoshi nyūdō (previously seen on the sugoroku board and just possibly in the matchbox label series). Its red, wrinkly flesh is nothing like the typical Overlooker’s, but its position, peering over Jizō’s shoulder, is appropriate. On the other hand, this may be an akanyūdō or "red initiate," a bald, red-skinned (but not wrinkly) yōkai mentioned in a Meiji-era scroll in the Yumoto Koichi collection.[1]

##### Tattoos in Print
Just as senjafuda collecting circles overlapped with circles of collectors of other materials (such as matchbox labels), senjafuda-based social networks often overlapped with other kinds of organizations. We’ve noted elsewhere the close relationship between senjafuda collectors and supporters of the Kanda Shrine Festival. On this page we look at the intersection of senjafuda culture with a very different kind of group: tattoo lovers.

Most visitors to this site will no doubt have heard of the Japanese practice of full-body tattooing: gloriously detailed images of gods, heroes, or monsters surrounded by waves, cherry blossoms, or other background designs that can extend over as much of the body as the individual likes. Complete coverage of back, buttocks, thighs, arms, and chest is not rare among people sporting such tattoos, and they can often involve several colors, although blue (or bluish-black) and red are usually prominent in color schemes.

While tattooing in various forms goes back into antiquity in Japan, the tattoos we’re talking about are a phenomenon that really begins in the 19th century—curiously, right around the time that senjafuda were becoming an object of exchange and collecting. And, like senjafuda, they owe a great deal to woodblock-print culture. The practice was in fact inspired by characters in the Ming-era Chinese vernacular novel Shuihu zhuan (in Japanese, Suikoden), or The Water Margin, which had been the focus of growing scholarly and popular interest throughout the 18th century in Japan. In the early 19th century, it was translated into accessible Japanese, igniting a popular vogue for Water Margin-alia in prints, plays, and other kinds of adaptations. Several of the book’s heroes are described as having large decorative tattoos on their backs, which gave the illustrator of the translation, Katsushika Hokusai, the chance to come up with dashing tattoo designs for the page. But it was Utagawa Kuniyoshi 歌川国芳 in the 1820s who really brought the full-body tattoo into fashion with a full-color print series of Suikoden heroes, many of whom (in his rendition) sported precisely the kind of blueish full-body tattoos that we now associate with Japan. In other words, Japanese tattooing as we know it was inspired by the illustrations in the translation of a Chinese book.[1]

Like any art form, tattoos were meant to be displayed, and were most sought by men who could display them: men whose jobs involved manual labor, and who therefore might legitimately work half-naked in hot weather. It was a plebeian art form, in other words—much like senjafuda. And just as senjafuda survived into the modern era among people most invested in preserving and reviving the past, tattooing also came to be imbued with a sense of tradition and nostalgia. This made it a perfect motif for senjafuda. And since yōkai were a perfect motif for tattoos…

Above are two slips from a series spotlighting arm tattoos. The album in which these are found has eight such slips; whether this represents the complete series is unknown. The first slip above shows a tattoo of a hannya mask with the striped prop often used by noh actors using this mask . The second slip shows a thunder god on his cloud (for more on both these motifs see the page on oni). The combination of fierce (yet elegantly rendered) tattoo and knotty arm muscles nicely conveys the appeal of tattooing.

Note that aside from the tattoos themselves and the daimei in the green square top left, the slips are identical. This is the case with all the slips in this series (well, in some the kimono is blue with a white pattern rather than white with a blue pattern—but the pattern itself is identical; incidentally that pattern is the logo of the senjafuda group that made these slips). The result effectively suggests how a tattoo can express an individual’s personality, making him stand out in a crowd.

In addition to the daimei, each slip in this series bears another legend: “To Ōkame.” This was a senjafuda collector who was also a tattoo enthusiast, a member of a group called the Chōyūkai 彫勇会 or “Tattooed Braves Association.” This group was founded in 1902 by a group of people sporting tattoos by the same master tattooer; they met regularly to show off their tattoos and celebrate tattoo culture. There seems to have been significant overlap in membership between the senjafuda collectives and the tattoo fans, as the slips below show.

The two slips above are from another series involving Ōkame. This one is dated August, 1916, and shows tattooed men bathing at a waterfall—both a traditional ascetic practice and a great opportunity to display their tattoos. This is part of a longer series showing eighteen men in a panoramic view of the pool; all are in the Starr collection. The set is reproduced and annotated in Miyamoto Tsuneichi’s Senjafuda.[2] They include a typically ferocious assortment of motifs; note the hannya mask motif again.

The slips above are from a set commemorating a later outing of the Chōyūkai, this one in 1925, to Ōyama. Among the motifs can be seen an assortment of demon and tengu masks, a mitsume (three-eyed monster), Shōki quelling a demon, skulls come to life, and a monster cat, among other strange and wonderful scenes. Is this a collection of yōkai? Is it a collection of tattoos? Is it a collection of senjafuda? Is it self-expression on the part of the tattoo artist, the men undergoing his needle, the senjafuda artist, or the collectors commissioning the slips—and how many of the men are playing multiple roles in this exchange? This series is a brilliant evocation of the interplay of social networks, collecting, nostalgia, amusement, riddling, print culture, and occasional eros at work in senjafuda.

This series is further discussed on this Kanda local history blog (Japanese only), which notes that Frederick Starr knew members of the Chōyūkai through his senjafuda activities. In 1932, at his request, he was invited to one of their gatherings, where he was able to observe dozens of tattooed men in the flesh.

##### References
[1] Michael Dylan Foster, Pandemonium and Parade: Japanese Monsters and the Culture of Yōkai (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009), pp. 7-9.

[1] Michael Dylan Foster, The Book of Yōkai: Mysterious Creatures of Japanese Folklore (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015).

[2] Dai yōkai ten: Oni to yōkai soshite Gegege (Mitsui Kinen Bijutsukan, 2013).

[3] Yasumura Toshinobu 安村敏信, Kawanabe Kyōsai—Kyōsai hyakki gadan 河鍋暁斎　暁斎百鬼画談 (Chikuma Gakugei Bunko, 2009).

[4] Noriko T. Reider, “Animating Objects: Tsukumogami ki and the Medieval Illustration of Shingon Truth,” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 36.2 (2009).

[1] Rebecca Salter, Japanese Popular Prints From Votive Slips to Playing Cards (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2006).

[1] For more about Japanese matchbox labels in the early 20th century, see Maggie Kinser Hohle, Matchibako: Japanese Matchbox Art of the 20s and 30s (Mark Batty Publisher, 2004).

[1] Yumoto Koichi, Yokai Museum: The Art of Japanese Supernatural Beings from YUMOTO Koichi Collection (PIE International, 2013).

[2] Yumoto Koichi, Yokai Wonderland: YUMOTO Koichi Collection (PIE International, 2017).

[3] Bakemono chakutōchō, illustrated by Kitao Masayoshi, is reprinted, transcribed, and annotated in Adam Kabat アダム・カバット, Edo bakemono sōshi 江戸化物草紙 (Shōgakukan, 1999).

[4] Kyōka hyaku monogatari, illustrated by Ryūsai Masazumi, is reprinted, transcribed, and annotated in Kyōgoku Natsuhiko 京極夏彦 and Tada Katsumi 多田克己, Yōkai gahon: Kyōka hyaku monogatari 妖怪画本・狂歌百物語 (Kokusho Kankōkai, 2008).

[1] For further discussion of the history of tattooing in Edo, with illustrations from ukiyo-e, see Sarah E. Thompson, Tattoos in Japanese Prints (Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, 2017).

[2] Miyamoto Tsuneichi 宮本常一, ed., Senjafuda 千社札 (Tankōsha, 1975).

## Yōkai, Individually
In the “Yōkai, collectively” section we explore ways in which yōkai are presented en masse, in large arrays that hint at a wide and crowded world of supernatural creatures. The idea there is to convey a sense of the variety of yōkai found in the early modern imagination as represented in senjafuda and other artifacts of woodblock-print culture. Along the way we explore some of the overarching concepts scholars have used to make sense of yōkai, in particular Michael Dylan Foster’s concepts of pandemonium and parade.

In this section, we focus on a select few yōkai that are well represented in the UO collection of senjafuda. The idea here is to get to know these creatures a little better while exploring the range of ways they’ve been used in senjafuda. Some of the yōkai best known to fans today appear in only one or two slips in the collection. By the same token fans might be surprised at which yōkai get the most attention from senjafuda collectors. A consideration of why this might be will help us to better understand the significance of yōkai in Japanese culture as a whole.

The slip above depicts a hakutaku 白澤 (Ch. baize) (“whitemarsh”). In Chinese tradition it’s one of several magical creatures that are thought to manifest themselves when a ruler’s reign is just. The hakutaku is envisioned as a horned creature with extra eyes on the side of its body; it can understand and speak the language of humans, and is sometimes depicted with a human face. In the Edo period printed amulets showing a hakutaku were sometimes carried to ward off danger. This slip reproduces one. The text beneath the image (dated 1559) is part of the original charm, and promises that whoever carries this picture of a hakutaku next to his or breast while striving to do good and shun evil will be preserved from all the calamities of mountain and sea, protected from illness, and guided to good fortune.

The original amulet is an example of how yōkai in early modern Japan could have significance beyond just entertainment—in this case, the hakutaku offers protection in exchange for faith. The senjafuda, in reproducing this amulet, is appealing to the antiquarian tastes of the modern collector, offering a piece of early modern religious culture. On another level, as a printed votive slip reproducing a printed amulet, this is woodblock-print culture in its latter days celebrating woodblock-print culture in its earliest days.

##### Kappa
Kappa are among the best-known yōkai today, both in Japan and abroad—they’ve even made their way into the Harry Potter mythos. At least in modern Japan, they have a relatively stable and easily identifiable set of characteristics: they live in water, have shells on their backs, like cucumbers, and on top of their head is a dish filled with water. If the water spills out of the dish, they’re weakened. As Michael Dylan Foster notes, the early history of the kappa concept is complex, incorporating a variety of legends about aquatic creatures from all over Japan, but by the late Edo period we can see a relatively stable imagination of the kappa in prints and books.[1] The sugoroku gameboard discussed elsewhere is a good example. The Starr-related slip above is another.

Despite their popularity in both the early modern and modern periods, kappa are noticeably scarce in the University of Oregon’s senjafuda collection. The Starr Collection contains very few compared to other kinds of yōkai, and while (as we’ll see) the Shōbundō Collection contains more, they’re mostly postwar. Those parts of the Shōbundō Collection that overlap with the Starr Collection, period-wise, are similarly free of kappa. It’s not easy to know exactly why this is, but one possibility suggests itself if we take a closer look at the kappa on the sugoroku board.

The “Kappa of Bandō Tarō” is pretty much everything a modern yōkai fan might expect—with one important exception. And this exception is significant for understanding how in modern Japan yōkai have been transformed from figures of menace to (mostly) harmless cartoon character-like beings. The kappa on the sugoroku board is not harmless, if you look closely: in its right hand it’s holding a baby, and with its left hand it’s extracting that baby’s internal organs.

The popular Edo period image of kappa held that they were particularly interested in extracting a victim’s shirikodama 尻子玉 or “butt-ball,” a mysterious piece of human anatomy that is only heard of in connection with kappa (maybe it only exists so kappa can seek it). It may be that what the Kappa of Bandō Tarō is extracting is the shirikodama itself, although from the size and shape of the extraction it seems more likely to be a group of organs accessed after removing the shirikodama. While this proclivity of the kappa’s was such common knowledge in the early modern period that it was thought fit for a children’s game, it has passed quietly out of the mythology of modern kappa.

This may be simply because the image of a sharp-clawed water creature disemboweling its victim from below is too violent and grotesque for modern sensibilities. But there may be a second reason why this aspect of kappa has been deemphasized in modern Japan. In early modern Japan, kappa were metaphorically associated with male-male sexuality. In early modern Japan, sexual relations between males were in many cases recognized or even celebrated. But over the course of Japan’s “modernization” along Western lines in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the West’s repressive attitude toward homosexuality came to be adopted in Japan, and sex between males came to be stigmatized.[2] Did this ultimately lead to a revision of how kappa came to be imagined? And do lingering associations with what was now deemed a socially unacceptable form of sexuality explain why there are so few in early 20th century senjafuda? After all, if anybody in the 1920s might be expected to know what kappa had once signified, it would be senjafuda collectors.

The first slip above appears in multiple copies in the Starr Collection, no doubt because it’s one representing Starr himself. It depicts a toothy and sharp-clawed kappa carrying a huge cucumber on its back. The two daimei at the top say “Starr” and “Gonzales” (Manuel Gonzales, Starr’s traveling companion), while the text above the kappa’s knee says “America.”

The second slip above is also connected with Starr; his name is one of three daimei “written on” the paper lanterns at bottom right. The other two names are Maebashi Han (short for Hanzan, Starr’s interpreter) and Setchō (Ōta Setchō, a calligrapher). The slip depicts, not a “real” kappa, but a man in a kappa costume, putting on a lively skit on what appears to be a festival stage. The kappa is being “caught” by Ebisu, one of the Seven Lucky Gods of Japanese popular belief; a god associated with fish and fisherman, Ebisu is often depicted in the act of catching a large fish. If Starr was notorious for his love of kappa (as his newspaper interview suggests), then this slip may be figuratively staging a kappa dance to welcome Starr to a senjafuda collectors’ meeting. Would it be going too far to imagine this is an image of Starr getting "hooked" on senjafuda?

The third slip, too, depicts not a “real” kappa but—probably—a fake one. The scene is a drinking party, and on the right a turtle (presumably not magical) has drawn eyes on a red lacquered dish and put the dish on its head to startle its drinking companions. Since “a turtle with a dish on its head” is a pretty good thumbnail description of a kappa, the slip may be inviting the viewer to see a visual pun on a kappa here. If the “kappa” on the right is a fake, its drinking companions are “real” yōkai, two shōjō 猩々. These are creatures ultimately derived from Chinese myth (Ch. xingxing), and are often depicted as red-haired boyish-faced creatures that understand human speech; they’re particularly fond of sake. Shōjō-turtle pairings are not unknown in late 19th century art; this one features a drinking party that has clearly gotten a bit out of hand. A label affixed to the album identifies the artist as Kawanabe Kyōsai, famous for his yōkai art and also a self-described shōjō (the term is also used sometimes to refer to a heavy drinker), but the signature doesn’t seem to be Kyōsai’s.

As noted above, kappa images are far more common in postwar senjafuda, as evidenced by the Shōbundō Collection. Below are four examples.

As Foster notes,[1] kappa illustrations have proliferated in postwar Japan due to a number of manga featuring kappa, and the kappa’s adoption as the mascot of a popular brand of sake. These uses have helped a (mostly) sanitized version of the kappa to regain its central place in the popular yōkai imagination. The slips above conform to this postwar vision of the kappa.

They’re from a set of six slips made in 1961 as “Six Views of the Kappa at Rest.” In the first image, “The Kappa’s Dance,” three kappa are dancing with abandon; one has a bandanna tied around his head, while another is wearing a lily pad as a hat. The red loincloths are a colorful (and modestly risqué) touch. In the second image, “The Kappa’s Dream,” a kappa is napping with his arms around a huge kabocha—dreaming it’s a gigantic cucumber, perhaps? In the third, “The Kappa Chanter,” an obviously female shamisen player accompanies a gidayū (dramatic) reciter. In “The Kappa’s Hand Game,” two kappa play a variant on rock-paper-scissors with cucumbers as the stakes. There may be a further yōkai reference here, as this version of the game, called "fox-fist," involves a fox, a hunter, and a landowner as the three options. The hunter beats the fox (because he can shoot it), but loses to the landowner (because the landowner can lord it over the hunter). The landowner can lord it over the hunter, but can be enchanted by the fox.

As an imagination of the daily life of a yōkai, these senjafuda correspond nicely to the oni series discussed elsewhere on this site: the yōkai’s life is like ours, but maybe a little more carefree. As depictions of kappa they’re expertly drawn humorous sketches—and, let’s be honest, a little kitschy. As such, they’re perfect examples of modern kappa.

##### Cats
Some of the best-known yōkai are ordinary animals that are believed to secretly have supernatural powers. Foxes and tanuki are the best-known examples of this type of yōkai, but cats are also known to shade over into monster territory. The yōkai sugoroku board discussed elsewhere on this site contains not one but five monster cats.

The cat yōkai in the second row from the bottom is a nekomata 猫又 or fork-tailed cat. By the same principle that animates tsukumogami, cats of advanced age were thought to develop forked tails and magical powers. One sign of this, evidently, was dancing madly on two legs—this is how the nekomata is depicted in Toriyama Sekien’s Gazu hyakki yagyō, and as we can see in the sugoroku depiction, the dancing cat (here with a rag on its head) is an eery fixture of yōkai iconology. Two more nekomata can be seen in the finish square at the top of the board; they, too, are dancing (and it’s a nice touch that their rags match those in the square below).

The ones in the finish square are attending on a bakeneko 化け猫 or "monster cat." While the distinction between bakeneko and nekomata is seldom clear, bakeneko are often imagined as including shape-shifting as one of their powers. The scene in the finish square comes from an 1827 play by the author of Yotsuya kaidan, Hitoritabi Tōkaidō gojūsantsugi (Traveling alone on the East Sea Road, All 53 Stages). In the scene in question (adapted from legends surrounding the post-town of Okazaki), a traveler stops for the night at an old temple, where he encounters an old woman who turns out to be a shape-shifting cat. After they fight, she flies away. Ukiyo-e depictions of the bakeneko scene in this play (and its frequent interpolations into later plays) made the tableau one of the most recognizable in kabuki, and have colored the imagination of yōkai cats ever since.

Below is another image associated with this play (also found at the top of this page). This slip is from a series called “Shadows of the Stage,” depicting famous moments from kabuki plays in silhouette—an elegant, sophisticated variation on the more playful silhouette prints discussed on the night parade page. It shows the bakeneko in the same half-transformed (humanoid but with cat features and fur) state as in the theater prints, showing just how recognizable the scene is. Compare this to a theater print by Utagawa Kuniyoshi 歌川国芳 (1798-1861) from an 1835 version of the scene; the original is a triptych, of which only the leftmost panel is in the collection of the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art. The complete triptych may be viewed here.

The final yōkai cat image is one designed by Kuniyoshi himself. It shows the hero Inumura Daikaku Masanori slaying a monster cat. It’s a scene from Eight Dogs (Hakkenden 八犬伝, full title Nansō Satomi hakkenden 南総里見八犬伝), an adventure novel by Kyokutei Bakin 曲亭馬琴 (1767-1848) that was serialized between 1814 and 1842 and was one of the most popular and influential works of fiction of the 19th century.

In the episode depicted in this scene, Daikaku has just learned that the man he thought was his father is actually a wicked shape-shifting catamount (yamaneko 山猫) that killed Daikaku’s father many years ago and took his place. The catamount devoured Daikaku’s mother and then fathered an equally wicked half-catamount son by the first woman he could find wicked enough to withstand his baleful influence. Daikaku, a dutiful son with high moral principles, can’t understand why his father and half-brother are so cruel, but he endures their treatment until he receives a message from the ghost of his real father explaining the situation and charging Daikaku with avenging him.[1] In the novel, the catamount is still in human form when he’s slain, and only reveals his monstrous true form in his death throes; in the senjafuda, Kuniyoshi shows Daikaku stabbing the catamount in its feline form (note the forked tail flicking up behind Daikaku).

What readers of the novel would have known is that this slip is actually showing two yōkai—or, at least, two creatures born of magic. One is the catamount. The other is Daikaku himself. He is one of the Eight Dog Warriors referred to in the book’s title, eight men born into eight different families who one by one learn that they’re the spiritual descendants of Fusehime, daughter of the Satomi samurai clan, and Yatsufusa, her beloved dog. Fusehime’s union with Yatsufusa was not a physical one, but a spiritual one facilitated by her faith in the Lotus Sutra, and each of the Dog Warriors is either born with or comes to possess a bead from a set of prayer-beads that Fusehime had owned. Each of these beads bears the character for one of the cardinal virtues (Daikaku’s is rei 礼 or “propriety”); the beads also display magical powers from time to time. The Dog Warriors themselves don’t have magical powers, or any outward canine qualities, but they’re conscious of being descended equally from a girl and her dog, by a mystic process nobody really understands.

The Dog Warriors, then, aren't precisely yōkai, and since many of the enemies they face in the course of this very long novel are supernatural, it's possible to see them as part of the lineage of heroes who conquer yōkai, like those assembled in the Heroes Clowning Around on a Tour of Hell print. But their dog heritage embeds a bit of yōkai in them, especially because their spiritual father Yatsufusa was nursed by a tanuki as a puppy—a tanuki inhabited by the angry ghost of one of Fusehime's father's enemies. The Dog Warriors, in other words, can also be thought of as a very Edo-period merging of hero tropes and the yōkai imagination.

The second slip above is also related to Eight Dogs, so we'll discuss it here although it doesn’t show a cat. Given the popularity of this story in the 19th century, it’s no surprise that the UO senjafuda collection contains several series that deal with it in whole or in part. This slip comes from a series called “Beautiful Braves on the Water Margin,” which brings together various handsome young heroes in dramatic scenes. The title, of course, refers to the Chinese novel discussed elsewhere on this site in connection with tattoos, and the senjafuda series is an adaptation to this format of an ukiyo-e series of the same name designed by Tsukioka Yoshitoshi 月岡芳年 (1839-1892). The ukiyo-e version of this scene can be seen here.

This slip depicts another of the Eight Dog Warriors: Inue Shinbei, whose cardinal virtue is jin 仁 or benevolence. At first glance the scene simply depicts Shinbei and a beautiful young woman exchanging a look through a blind, but to someone familiar with the story the image is shot through with magic and menace. Shinbei appears in the story relatively late, and but his chief nemesis is a being introduced very early: the tanuki that nursed the dog Yatsufusa. As noted above, this tanuki had been possessed by the angry spirit of a dead enemy of the Satomi family. This spirit’s plan to bring down the family via the family dog fails, but the possessed tanuki lives on and reappears in the story as the sorceress Myōchin, who masterminds an insurrection that nearly brings down the Satomi. Shinbei saves the day, and in the process reveals Myōchin to have been a tanuki all along. This scene depicts an imaginary confrontation between the baby-faced Shinbei (who is only nine, although he's as big as a full-grown warrior) and Myōchin in human form—her wild hair and fierce expression hint at her malevolence.

##### Foxes
Foxes (kitsune 狐) are another of the most famous and best-loved of yōkai. From time immemorial they’ve been credited with shape-shifting abilities and the power to bewitch or even possess humans, which makes them feared as yōkai. But their status as servants of the Shintō harvest god Inari also makes them objects of reverence. Their association with Inari helps explain why they’re one of the most common motifs in senjafuda; this connection is explored in depth on the page about collectors and foxes. This page, meanwhile, will concentrate on more overtly yōkai-esque depictions of foxes.

This includes the two slips above. The first (also discussed in connection with yōkai and parades) depicts a fox wedding procession, or kitsune no yomeiri 狐の嫁入り. Early modern weddings included a procession escorting the bride from her parents’ house to her new husband’s house, ceremonially demonstrating how a bride was thought to be leaving her old family behind and joining her new one. Children’s stories extended this practice to other creatures, with stories of mouse weddings and monster weddings featuring the same kind of procession. Foxes, too, were thought to have wedding processions, but given their magical nature their ceremonies were attended by eery signs: rain from a clear sky. This unusual but real phenomenon is still called “a fox wedding procession.” In the first slip above the procession is depicted at the bottom of a two-chō slip, in delicate sketchwork. The bride is in a palanquin being carried on poles in the center of the parade of attendants. More attendants at the back of the train carry a chest containing her trousseau, while attendants in the front carry large paper lanterns.

The second slip also shows a fox parade, or rather the front end of it. We can see the lantern bearers, assorted attendants, and at the right edge of the slip a palanquin with a foxy face peeking out through the window. The procession is cutting behind a shrine gate, which frames the name of the business being advertised by this slip: the Unohi-za, a small theater that stood in the Shukuin-chō area of the city of Sakai, south of Osaka. Note that this slip, while found among the Starr senjafuda, does not have the chō outlines visible in the background that a multi-chō senjafuda normally would (compare with the first slip). It may in fact simply be a flyer for this theater.

**Trickster Foxes**
The five slips below highlight two aspects of the fox as magical being. One is its proclivity for enchanting humans for their own amusement. The other is its connection with Inari worship. Often when foxes are depicted in their capacity as messengers of the god, their mischievous nature is downplayed, but not here. In each case these foxes are playing their tricks on or very near shrine grounds. And in fact the stated theme of the 1927 series from which the first four come is: “Famous Inari Festivals of Edo and People Being Bewitched by Foxes.” In the senjafuda imagination, at least, there’s no distinction between godly foxes and trickster foxes.

The first slip celebrates the Toyokawa Inari shrine in Akasaka, Tokyo (the name of the shrine in each slip is written on the banner on the left side of the scene). It shows a man playing a game with three foxes. The two foxes on either side of the man, holding a rope with a loop in it, are dressed as women, suggesting the man thinks he’s amusing himself with geisha. The fox in the center, in its animal form, has one paw raised in a gesture echoed by the man’s hands, suggesting that this fox is the puppeteer.

The second slip celebrates the Gōriki Inari shrine. Here a pair of men have stripped to their loincloths and are about to face each other in sumo wrestling. The fox in the background with the fan is the referee about to start the match, and two more foxes are sitting “ringside,” ready to enjoy the match. This shrine seems to have been associated with feats of strength; it boasts a large stone said to have been lifted in a demonstration of strength by Sannomiya Unosuke, a famous early 19th century strongman. This may explain why the foxes here have selected sumo for their entertainment.

The third slip celebrates the Hikan Inari shrine in Asakusa. Here too one of the foxes seems to be orchestrating the action with raised paws. Another is seated on the back of a man who has clearly been convinced he’s a horse. His friend marches next to him like a samurai’s attendant, but he’s holding an Inari shrine banner instead of a spear.

The fourth slip celebrates the Ana no Inari or “Burrow Inari” shrine, so called because it was built over a fox burrow; today the shrine is known as the Hanazono Inari. The fox at left has bewitched two peasants into thinking that they’re samurai retainers on parade. The one on the left is holding his broom like a spear, while the other man has placed a kabocha atop a pole in imitation of the decorative finials used in processions. The loose loincloth is an appropriately comic touch, showing just how deluded the men are.

The fifth slip is unrelated to the first four but similarly shows foxes working mischief in full view of a shrine gate. Here foxes have enchanted two senjafuda pasters into thinking they’re having their hair dressed by professional barbers. The slip is discussed in further detail on the “Collectors and foxes” page.

In each case, what’s worth noting is how harmless these foxes’ pranks are. Some foxes of legend use their powers in more vicious ways, but these foxes are hurting nothing more than their victims’ dignity. It’s all in good fun, at least in these slips.

**Foxes in Kabuki**
The first two slips below show magical foxes in the more dramatic form that’s typical of their appearances in kabuki plays, where their shape-shifting abilities are utilized to add an air of the uncanny to gloriously melodramatic plots.

The first slip has to do with one of the best-known fox stories in Japan, that of Genkurō the fox. It’s told in the classic 1747 play Yoshitsune and the Thousand Cherry Trees (Yoshitsune senbonzakura 義経千本桜). The play follows medieval warrior-hero Yoshitsune as he flees to safety when his brother, the shogun Yoritomo, seeks to destroy him. Yoshitsune sends away his mistress, the dancer Shizuka, and asks one of his retainers, Tadanobu, to watch after her; Yoshitsune gives Shizuka a drum as a keepsake. Yoshitsune eventually finds temporary refuge in Hiraizumi, where Shizuka catches up with him, Tadanobu still watching over her. Then another Tadanobu shows up, and it’s revealed that the Tadanobu following Shizuka was in fact a shape-shifting fox. In a famous series of transformations between human, humanoid fox, and fox forms, the fox Tadanobu tells how long ago his parents were caught and their pelts used to make the drum that Yoshitsune gave to Shizuka. The fox has been seeking the drum ever since, out of loyalty to his parents. Touched by his filial piety, Yoshitsune gives the fox the drum, and also gives the fox one of his own names: Genkurō. The fox Genkurō rejoices and promises to watch over Yoshitsune in battle forever after. The play’s combination of heart-tugging filial piety narrative and unnerving yōkai effects have made it a favorite of audiences since the 18th century.

This slip is sponsored by a rakugo performer, Kokontei Shinba, and it’s called kitsunebi 狐火, or fox-fire, the mystic flames that are seen dancing in the air near foxes when they’re at their most yōkai-esque. In stage presentations of the Genkurō story, the robes worn by the actor playing the fox are decorated with kitsunebi, much like the robe worn here. This slip appears to depict the dancer Shizuka, instead of the fox, but she’s wearing the fox-actor’s robe and her right hand is held in a position meant to suggest a fox’s paw. She’s holding a warrior’s helmet, a reference to a scene in the play where the fox Tadanobu sets up a suit of armor by a tree and Shizuka places the drum on top for a head, then dances before it as if it were her master.

The second slip is part of a series in which each slip presents two smaller images, each approximately of a size and shape to suggest matchbox labels, against the distinctively striped curtain used on the kabuki stage. Here the lower image is of a kabuki actor, while the upper image shows a fox surrounded by kitsunebi. The writing on the upper image identifies the actor and the role: Ichikawa Ichizō 市川市蔵 in the role of Ogasawara Haito in the play The Ogasawara Disturbance (Ogasawara sōdō 小笠原騒動). In the play, Haito saves a fox, who later comes back to protect Haito.

The third slip above depicts a kabuki play that has nothing to do with foxes. The play is the famed Wait a Moment! (Shibaraku 暫), a showcase for the actors in the hereditary Ichikawa Danjūrō line. The costume, with its oversized sleeves emblazoned with the actor’s family crest three concentric squares, is particularly famous. This slip shows a fox taking the place of the actor; in fact it’s a paper fox puppet of the type discussed on the “Collecting and appreciating” page. As such it doesn’t relate to a stage depiction of a shape-shifting fox, but rather approaches the intersection of senjafuda, kabuki, and fox beliefs from a different angle.

**Fox-Priests**
The votive slip below relates to a shape-shifting fox popularized not in kabuki but in kyōgen, a comic theater tradition dating back to the medieval period. The fox is known as Hakuzōsu and features in a play called Fox-Catching (Tsurigitsune 釣狐). The play centers on a man who traps foxes. A shape-shifting fox assumes the form of the man’s uncle, a priest called Hakuzōsu. In this guise he tries to put a stop to the trapper’s activities by scaring him with tales of fox yōkai. But when it sees the deep-fried rat the trapper has been using as bait for his traps, the fox can’t help himself: he takes the bait (an excerpt from this passage in the play can be viewed here). In this way the play, like most kyōgen, moves through a series of comic reversals between hunter and priest/fox, ending in a stalemate (the fox manages to escape from the trap).

The slip below is part of a series called “Shadows of the Stage” that shows scenes from plays in silhouette—the viewer is being challenged to recognize the play and the scene from a mere shadow on a screen (this series is also discussed on the “Cats” page). This slip shows the fox from Fox-Catching in profile, wearing a monk’s robes and hood and carrying a walking stick, but in an intermediate stage of transformation revealing its true nature as a fox.

The motif of a fox in priestly garb was taken up by artists in other media, too. The next two images above also show Hakuzōsu, but in three-dimensional form. They’re netsuke 根付, a form of personal accessory once common in Japan. Early modern clothing didn’t have pockets in the same way modern trousers and shirts do. Instead, one often placed small personal items such as the ubiquitous pipe and tobacco in small pouches with cords attached; the cords were then passed through one’s sash, so the pouch would hang suspended. A toggle was attached to the end of the cords to catch on the sash and keep the item from falling. These toggles, netsuke, developed into highly sought after miniature carvings in wood, ivory, coral, or other material. And just like senjafuda (another miniature art form), many netsuke drew on popular stories for their artistic motifs.

The first netsuke above shows Hakuzōsu in much the same way as in the senjafuda: fox-faced, but in humanoid form wearing priestly robes and hood and leaning on a staff. Here the fox is facing downward—perhaps gazing hungrily at a deep-fried rat? The second netsuke shows the same subject, but with an ingenious twist—the face actually rotates. On one side (shown in the photo) is a human priest’s face, and on the other is a fox’s muzzle. The carver has cunningly created a netsuke that, like its fox subject, can shape-shift.

The fourth item above is also a netsuke, and at first glance it too may seem to depict Hakuzōsu, but a closer examination reveals something else. This is a man in a fox mask, and what appears to be a priestly hood is a rain-hood made of straw. Whether this relates to another story or is simply a playful image is unclear. But it, like the other two netsuke, suggest an even more personal connection with yōkai than in senjafuda. As articles of attire (in theory, at least) these netsuke would have been something a possessor used and handled on a daily basis, and thus an opportunity for self-expression on a very personal level, like a keychain or smartphone case for a modern person. The appearance of yōkai in netsuke further attests to their centrality in early modern culture (and in modern representations of early modern culture).

##### Tengu
Tengu have a very long history in the Japanese imagination of the supernatural. Like tsukumogami, they’re in some ways more closely associated with medieval tales, so they don’t always show up in early modern yōkai group portraits (note the absence of a tengu on the sugoroku board). But older tengu stories continued to be told, and tengu imagery was preserved in masks, ema, and other religious paraphernalia. And as discussed on the “Collectors and tengu” page, tengu played an important part in the senjafuda practitioner’s self-image, making them a frequent appearance in senjafuda. The beautiful but enigmatic slip above is a further example of that, showing a scroll containing (among other writing) the names of some senjafuda groups, partially contained in a wooden box marked “thousand shrine pilgrimage.” Bundles of simple daimei fuda meant for pasting are scattered around, and in the background is a small decorative tengu mask affixed to a wooden plaque, making it seem as if all the senjafuda activities represented by the various items are taking place under the tengu’s watchful eye.

More examples of the self-reflexive use of tengu in senjafuda are explored on the collectors and tengu page. This page will mostly concentrate on instances when tengu are being depicted for their own sake.

The slip above shows a tengu's face (or the mask of one) on what's identified as a charm against cholera (korori 虎狼痢) originating in Osaka. The tiny hat is part of the tengu's garb as a yamabushi; the combination of priestly imagery and the tengu's stern, forbidding visage no doubt made it a fitting image for banishing disease.

The word tengu is usually written with characters that mean “heaven’s hound” 天狗, and as Michael Dylan Foster notes,[1] ancient references to tengu did seem to connect them with dogs, but that association was soon lost. Medieval depictions of the tengu associated them with crows, and early modern depictions usually envisioned them as red-faced priestly men with long noses. Proverbially associated with the quality of arrogance, they can be mischievous or downright violent.

Tengu are almost always presented in the garb of a Buddhist priest, specifically a yamabushi 山伏 or “hider in mountains.” Yamabushi were familiar yet mysterious figures in the medieval and early modern religious landscape: they lived on mountains and engaged in ascetic practices reputed to give them magical powers. Despite their religious lifestyle they appear in stories as social outsiders, figures of mischief or outright menace, characteristics shared by tengu. In popular stories and plays tengu came to be conflated with yamabushi, as each was thought capable of transforming into the other.[2]

The relationship between tengu and Buddhism goes far deeper than appearance. The defining characteristic of tengu in medieval legends is their opposition to Buddhism. Haruko Wakabayashi explains that tengu “were identified with 'ma,' the enemy of the Dharma or the temptations of passion and desire that hinder one from attaining ōjō [rebirth in the Pure Land].”[3] But in medieval narratives, what appears at first to be evil or inimical often later proves to be good, a manifestation of Buddha’s mercy, disguised, an expedient means to lead people toward salvation. In the case of tengu, antagonism to Buddhism is often transformed into a kind of perverse sponsorship of Buddhism. In the kind of paradox that medieval storytelling revels in, tengu are both threats to and protectors of Buddhism. They’re both priests and anti-priests.

**Tengu and Mount Kurama**
The tengu's duality (or non-duality!) is perhaps best expressed in the legend of the tengu of Mt. Kurama, one of the most famous of all tengu stories. It emerged in the medieval period as an outgrowth of the story of Minamoto no Yoshitsune, a twelfth century warrior who helped his brother Yoritomo defeat the Taira warrior federation and esablish their own Minamoto as the supreme power in the land. After Yoritomo established himself as shogun he turned on Yoshitsune, leading to events chronicled in plays such as Yoshitsune and the Thousand Cherry Trees (discussed in relation to shape-shifting foxes elsewhere on this site).

Tengu enter Yoshitsune’s life when he’s a young boy. With the country under the domination of the Taira, Yoshitsune, as the scion of the rival Minamoto federation, is a potential threat. He’s sent to the monastery on Mt. Kurama to be raised by priests, but while there he knows only persecution from the young Taira boys who are his fellow acolytes. And despite his piety, young Yoshitsune is more cut out to be a warrior than a monk: he takes to practicing martial skills alone in remote mountain vales near the temple. In some versions of the story these vales are merely spooky, but in many versions they’re described as the abode of tengu, who take the boy under their wing and train him in the martial arts. His future success as a warrior, then, is in many legends credited to supernatural aid.

The most influential presentation of the Yoshitsune-tengu legend is the 15th century noh play Kurama tengu 鞍馬天狗. The play begins with the boy Yoshitsune, ostracized by the other acolytes, encountering a mysterious yamabushi, himself shunned by the priests on the mountain. The boy is kind to the yamabushi, and this human connection leads the yamabushi to reveal himself as the Great Tengu of Mt. Kurama, and to take Yoshitsune under his protection. The Great Tengu sends servant tengu (called “leaf tengu” or konoha tengu 木葉天狗) to begin Yoshitsune’s training, and then finally trains the boy himself, promising him protection and aid ever after. By the end the tengu is revealed to be firmly on the side of good (Yoshitsune is in every way a hero)—but the play never lets us forget that tengu are also threatening, monstrous figures who “live in enmity of men,” as the play puts it.

The magnificent triptych above is a depiction of the Yoshitsune-tengu encounter as legends imagine it happening. Entitled “Yoshitsune on Mount Kurama,” it’s by Utagawa Yoshikazu, the same artist who created the yōkai sugoroku board discussed elsewhere. In the right panel we see the Great Tengu of Mount Kurama (here called Kurama Sōjōbō, after Bishop’s Vale, the spot on the mountain where the play has him first encounter Yoshitsune): he’s the white-haired mountain of a man seated in front. He’s given human features, but his left hand, covered by his red robe, makes for a shape suspiciously reminiscent of the long red nose seen in other depictions of tengu (such as the senjafuda at the top of this page). The Great Tengu is surrounded by other named tengu (the play lists several tengu who fly here from other holy mountains all over the country); two are presented in more crow-like guise, while one is shown in human form. In the center panel we see the boy Yoshitsune (here identified by his boyhood name of Ushiwakamaru) sparring with several unnamed leaf tengu. The leaf tengu are depicted as having the wings and beaks of ravens (but with monstrous teeth in their beaks). Yoshitsune, who seems to have already learned to fly from the tengu, is besting them easily. In the left panel, looking on admiringly, are three warriors who will come to serve or aid Yoshitsune in various capacities (and figure in various stories and plays). From left they’re Kijirō Sachitane, Hitachibō Kaizon, and Kisanta Seietsu.

The diptych above shows the same encounter as it appears on the noh stage. At left is the Great Tengu, and at right is the boy Yoshitsune. Yoshitsune is played by a child actor wielding a halberd (naginata) instead of the sword shown in the triptych. The tengu is played by a mature actor in a mask and red wig. The mask is of the variety known as a beshimi 癋見, and it shows a grimacing, bearded face that’s close to human but meant to suggest a god or demon. This, rather than the long-nosed mask familiar from later eras, is what is used on the noh stage for tengu. The actor also hold a fan made of feathers, an accessory also found in depictions of Daoist wizards and understood to be a magical item allowing flight and other feats. The print is by artist Tsukioka Kōgyo 月岡耕漁 (1869-1927), known for several series of prints that, like this one, depict noh actors in costume acting out scenes from plays. His prints combine a documentary approach, paying close attention to details of costuming and posture, with a subtle sense of stylization—here the figures seem to be floating in a grayish-blue void, drawing the viewer’s attention to the vibrant color of their robes and the tension of their confrontation. The Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art holds around seventy noh prints by Kōgyo; two more are discussed on the “Oni” page.

The three senjafuda above all relate to the Kurama legend in some way. The first depicts a tengu as presented on the noh stage, most likely from the play Kurama tengu. The intentionally muted colors of this slip show a sense of restraint appropriate to a noh-related slip, and if anything only serve to elevate the impact of the costume, mask, and feather fan.

The second shows two crow-beaked tengu facing off in a sparring match. The slip, from the late Edo period, seems to be incomplete. A heavily muscled red arm extends into the frame from the right, holding a fan in the manner of a referee; presumably the scene continues to the right to reveal the identity of the referee (the Great Tengu? another yōkai?), but this is all we have. The referee’s fan suggests an improvised sumo match during an outing to enjoy cherry blossoms (note the petals wafting gently through the scene); the play Kurama tengu is set during cherry blossom season. This slip was designed by ukiyo-e artist Utagawa Yoshitsuya 歌川芳艶 (1822-66).

The third slip shows what appears to be the figures set atop a Kanda Shrine Festival float. Here the boy Yoshitsune balances on the Great Tengu’s forearm. Note that Yoshitsune is armed with a fan rather than a sword or halberd here, and that while the tengu’s costume and fan resemble that used on the noh stage, his nose is long and his face is red, unlike the beshimi mask. For more discussion of slips showing the Kanda Festival floats, see the page on “Yōkai, collectively.”

**Tengu Masks**
As noted above, tengu were often depicted with crow-like beaks and wings, and just as often with human features. On the noh stage they were depicted as supernatural beings, but with fairly human-looking faces. However, during the early modern period it became standard to depict tengu with red faces and long noses, and masks of this design became standard parts of popular religious observance. Long-nosed tengu masks are by far the most frequent way in which tengu appear in senjafuda. This is to say that while some senjafuda depict tengu themselves, far more depict tengu masks, or festival floats or other mock-ups utilizing tengu masks (and some of these are meant to depict the god Sarutahiko, who has come to be represented with a tengu mask, rather than tengu per se).

The first slip above is a classic view of the standard tengu mask as mask: red, long nose, bushy white facial hair. The strap by which the mask would be attached to the wearer’s head is visible, suggesting it’s ready to be donned and used, perhaps in a festival setting. The mask sits atop a drum and a ceremonial spear stands in the background; both would also be used in a festival parade or dance. Interestingly, the artist’s signature on this slip is the same as on the slip showing the tengu from the noh stage above.

The second slip is part of a series showing ema (discussed further on the origins and offerings page); the ema here shows two tengu masks, one in the crow design and the other of the long-red-nose type.

The third and fourth slips show one particular use of the long-nosed tengu mask. Here oversized masks are mounted on frames and worn as backpacks. The white clothing on the people carrying these curious items marks them as pilgrims; in fact, pilgrims to the Konpira Shrine on Shikoku customarily carried such backpacks on their way to the shrine. The sight of white-clad pilgrims walking away while a tengu glares back at the viewer was immortalized in landscape printmaker Utagawa Hiroshige 歌川広重’s depiction of Numazu in his Fifty-Three Stages of the Tōkaidō series in the 1830s.

The fifth and sixth slips use the tengu mask for its obvious phallic properties. The fifth represents a failed attempt to wrap the mask in a cloth; the side of the nose and part of the beard can be glimpsed in a way that seems vaguely obscene. The sixth is even more graphic. It sets the tengu mask next to another familiar folk-art mask, one variously known as Okame, Ofuku, or Otafuku. Regardless of the name, this mask depicts a smiling, round-cheeked young woman and is used in various comic contexts. Here the slip is showing the two masks placed in such a way as to accidentally-on-purpose suggest sex.

For many more examples of the use of tengu in senjafuda, see the page on “Collectors and tengu.“

##### Oni
Oni are by far the most common yōkai in senjafuda (as seen in the UO collections), if only because what we’re calling oni comprise such a broad category. These creatures are immediately identifiable (although there are a few visually distinctive varieties), but surprisingly hard to define.

This hard-to-define-ness comes out in the varying translations used for the word oni 鬼. Sometimes it’s translated “demon” and sometimes “ogre.” But for most English speakers, “demon” and “ogre” have very different connotations. We tend to associate demons with hell, the afterlife, sin and its punishment, and evil. By contrast we tend to imagine ogres as earthly creatures: maybe big and lumbering and hostile, but not necessarily evil in a metaphysical way.

The concept of oni encompasses both of these figures. Some oni are this-worldly monsters: big, toothy, and scary, but not denizens of hell. Other oni are not just residents of hell, they’re its staff: jailers and torturers who administer the most macabre of punishments to sinners. But the concept of oni is even broader than that. The word oni (in the character’s alternate reading of ki) is embedded in the traditional name of the night parade of a hundred demons, discussed extensively elsewhere on this site. But any artistic representation of that parade includes many, many monsters that don’t fit either of the above descriptions of oni. In fact, the term oni is traditionally used as a catch-all term for all kinds of monsters; in a sense, it’s almost a synonym for yōkai itself.

The concept gets even more elastic when we take into account the fact that some characters for “spirit” incorporate the character for oni, or even use it outright. In other words, there’s conceptual overlap between oni and ghosts, too. Finally, some gods are represented in the form of demons, which destabilizes any neat opposition we may want to find between good and evil, heaven and hell, high and low, in oni lore.[1]

This page will explore the variety of ways oni manifest themselves in early modern yōkai lore, as seen in senjafuda.

**Identifying Oni**
As noted above, oni are generally easy to identify. They have horns and sharp teeth. They’re generally either red or blue/green (ao 青, a color concept that can encompass both blue and green). They’re large and muscular and generally fierce-looking. They often carry weapons; an iron club is a favorite. They’re usually shown dressed in loincloths or skirts made from the skins of tigers or other exotic animals.

The slip in the center above is in many ways typical. It shows a red-fleshed oni with horns, sharp teeth, sharp claws, and brawny build. It also has wild curly hair. It’s wearing the skin of a lion or similar creature around its waist; it also has shinguards that look to be made of the same material. Its bracelets and flowing scarf-like wrap are also items often seen on oni. The slip on the left shows much the same type of oni: this one is green-skinned and has flamelike eyebrows and facial hair (perhaps they’re actual flames).

The slip on the right shows one significant variation or subcategory in oni iconography: the hannya. The word hannya ultimately derives from the Japanese name of the Buddhist Prajnaparamita sutras. It comes into oni lore as the name of a type of mask used in noh plays. One theory is that the medieval craftsman who designed the mask went by the name Hannya, and so the mask was named after him. In any case, the mask is often white or light-colored and has long horns, devilish eyes, and a wide, toothy smile. In noh plays it’s used to portray women who have been transformed (usually by jealousy or rage) into monsters or demons; such characters often carry a red and white striped staff known as an uchizue, meant to represent an oni’s weapon. So well known did this mask become that often female demons are drawn with faces identical to it, and many modern people use the term hannya to refer to female demons in general.

**Ogre-like Oni**
The three images below show oni in aspects close to what is conjured up by the English word “ogre.”

The first is a four-chō senjafuda depicting a wooden votive plaque, itself depicting an oni known as Ibaraki Dōji (wooden votive plaques in general are discussed on the “Origins and offerings” page). In the most familiar forms of his tale, Ibaraki Dōji is an oni retainer of an even more powerful oni called Shuten Dōji, who lives on Mount Ōe (Mount Ibuki, in some versions) and kidnaps women to devour them. (Three versions of the main Shuten Dōji story may be viewed on the Hyogo Prefectural History Museum's website.) Shuten Dōji is defeated by a band of warriors led by Minamoto no Raikō; one of Raikō’s retainers, Watanabe no Tsuna, cuts off Ibaraki Dōji’s arm and takes it home as a trophy. To get his arm back, Ibaraki Dōji disguises himself as Tsuna’s aunt and sneaks into his house. In the image, Ibaraki’s arm is oni-red, while the face, while lacking horns, is reminiscent of a hannya mask—appropriate, since he’s in the guise of a woman.

The next two images are prints by Tsukioka Kōgyo depicting the noh play Rashōmon (Kōgyo’s noh prints are also discussed on the tengu page). This play is based on old legends that said an oni lived in the top of the huge, ruined Rashōmon gate at the southern entrance to Kyoto (a medieval story about this demon was adapted into the story “Rashōmon” by modern writer Akutagawa Ryūnosuke; his story provided the framing device for Kurosawa Akira’s classic film of the same name). In the play, Minamoto no Raikō and his men are drinking when they hear rumors of the oni in the gate, so Raikō sends his retainer Tsuna to check on it. Tsuna encounters the demon and defeats it by cutting off its arm. The parallels between this story and that of Ibaraki Dōji are curiously close; Noriko Reider explores them in Chapter 2 of Japanese Demon Lore.[1]

In the first print, the viewer is placed behind the actor playing Tsuna, so that we, like Tsuna, are facing the oni head on. In the play, the oni attacks Tsuna from behind, tearing off his helmet; in the print, the oni holds the helmet to its chest—it’s covered with black hair and has two metal ornaments protruding from the top. In the second print, the helmet is shown in an inset. The contrast in composition between these two prints is striking, one showing the oni towering over the warrior, the other perhaps suggesting a more even match.

**Demon-like Oni**
The senjafuda series above is an example of oni appearing in a capacity that fits the English term demon. The series, also discussed on the page “Collectors and oni,” depicts in senjafuda form a hell scroll, a popular medieval way to depict the horrors of hell in an effort to convince mortals not to sin. Medieval and early modern Japan had an amazingly detailed iconography of hell (discussed further by Caroline Hirasawa),[2] and this “scroll” shows many of the best-loved (or most-feared) features of it. After a dedicatory inscription we see a milepost for the River of Three Ways (Sanzu no kawa 三途の川), the border of hell, and then we encounter datsueba 奪衣婆, the “robe-stripping crone,” a figure who relieves the newly dead of their clothes. The next panel is missing from the Starr Collection version of this series, but from the desk and mirror on the next panel we know it features Enma, King of Hell, who sits at his bureaucrat’s desk and judges the dead before sending them off to the appropriate punishment. A pale dead man kneels before the desk pleading, while another behind him is being dragged off by a blue-skinned oni.

The next several panels show oni in their element, tormenting sinners. We see red, blue, and green skinned oni wielding clubs and swords. We see them tossing sinners into a boiling cauldron (which in some tellings contains human urine and feces), pulling them around in a flaming cart, beating them, dragging them by the hair, consigning them to a pool of blood, tearing them limb from limb. We also see the dead partially transformed into beasts. It’s a truly terrifying litany of tortures, and to be fair, this early 20th century rendition is tame compared to many medieval versions. But at the end there’s hope, as a bodhisattva appears in hell to deliver sinners into Buddha’s paradise. It’s a tour de force of senjafuda design, as well as a vivid example of the demon torturer aspect of oni.

Above are two more images of oni in hell. The first (also discussed on the “Collectors and oni” page) focuses on King Enma at his desk. Next to the desk stands Seeing Eye and Sniffing Nose, which help Enma discern people’s misdeeds, and a giant mirror that shows sinners what they’re to be punished for. Datsueba can be seen in the background, along with a pool of blood, a boiling cauldron, and other standard features of hell scenes. Of note are the two great bluish oni on the left. One is staring at the mirror, while the other is seems to be looking out of the picture at us. The second image (also discussed on the “Yōkai, collectively” page) is an ukiyo-e diptych that features a comic reversal of the standard hell scene. Here a band of legendary heroes has come to hell and taken over, giving Enma and various oni a taste of their own medicine.

**King Enma**
King Enma is not himself an oni. An Indian deity absorbed into Buddhism, he was originally conceived of as a heavenly being before assuming his now familiar role as king of hell.  Similarly, as Buddhism moved across East Asia the conception of what a king of hell would look like and do merged with Chinese beliefs about post-death judgments until Enma came to be called a king but sit as a judge. In Japan, he is invariably depicted wearing Chinese style clothing and surrounded by Chinese style furnishings and trappings of officialdom. (See Hirasawa [2] for more details about Enma.) He is also often depicted as red-faced, at least in senjafuda, suggesting a visual association with the oni that usually surround him.

Depictions of Enma are almost as popular in senjafuda as depictions of oni proper; several examples are seen above. Many of these are also discussed on the “Collectors and oni” page.

The first slip depicts Enma seated on his throne, staring off into the distance. The incense burner on the table in front of him tips the viewer off that this isn’t a picture of the “real” Enma, but rather an icon of him. Such icons are common in Buddhist temples in Japan, and the series title of this slip (“Annual Observances in Edo”) suggests that this is the icon found in the no-longer-extant Enma Hall in Asakusa. The second slip is doing the same thing, commemorating a “Famous Spot in Naniwa,” i.e., Osaka, the Enma Hall at Gappōgatsuji. The rest of the slips depict Enma (or Enma statues) interacting with senjafuda culture in various ways: holding up a votive slip in lieu of his standard flat wooden scepter, or maintaining his famous scowl in spite of slips being festooned on his shoulders, knees, or even nose.

**Thunder Gods**
The four images below show not oni per se, but thunder gods, or raijin 雷神. But thunder gods, along with the wind gods or fūjin 風神 with which they’re sometimes paired (as in these famous 17th century screen paintings by Tawaraya Sōtatsu), are always depicted in ways that are hardly if at all distinguishable from oni. This may seem strange at first, given the strong association of oni with hell that we’ve just been exploring, but we should note that even in their capacity as hell’s guards, oni aren’t evil in the way Western culture envisions demons to be. Oni aren’t tempters, trying to entice people to hell; rather, they’re simply carrying out the necessary task of punishing sinners. If anything, they can be seen as serving Buddhist truth, rather than opposing it. This means that we shouldn’t perceive any contradiction between the same iconography being applied to oni and gods. Thunder is, of course, a fundamentally frightening phenomenon, so it’s doubly appropriate that when it takes a visible form it be monstrous.

In addition to the standard attributes of red skin, horns, and tiger-skin wrap, thunder gods are usually pictured with drums of some sort, often arranged in a circle around them. The rather friendly-looking thunder god in the first slip above is fairly typical (although his blue jacket is unusual). The second image above substitutes a large hand-drum for the ring of drums; this is a handcarved sculpture similar in feeling to, but larger than, a netsuke. The bodily detail given to the thunder god and his child is marvelous, if a bit creepy.

The third and fourth images are senjafuda playfully imagining what thunder gods can do from their vantage in the clouds. The first shows one fishing for daimei fuda; it may remind a modern viewer of certain carnival games. The second one shows a thunder god leering at the derriere of someone crawling into a mosquito net.

**Repelling Oni**
If the conception of oni is broad enough and flexible enough to encompass gods, it’s still fair to say that on a basic level oni are perceived as being threatening and monstrous. It’s in that capacity that oni figure in a centuries-old custom that, judging by senjafuda, people had a lot of affection for in the early 20th century (many still do today, for that matter). Setsubun 節分, a holiday observing the beginning of spring (formerly coinciding with the lunar New Year), was observed by tossing a handful of toasted soybeans while saying “oni wa soto, fuku wa uchi”—“out with demons, in with good fortune.” Oni in the saying can be taken metaphorically, to mean bad fortune or bad influences, but was often represented literally—in some places, the beans were thrown at a person wearing an oni mask, to chase him away.

The first slip above, a four-chō senjafuda labeled “Setsubun,” can be taken as a “straight” representation of this tradition, although the formal trousers of the man throwing the beans and the boy holding the lamp mark this as a high-ranking samurai household, and thus nostalgic from the early 20th century vantage of this slip. The second slip is a little more imaginative, as we can see the hindquarters of an oni fleeing from the man throwing beans. The third slip refers to the practice by pairing an oni mask with a mask of Ofuku (also discussed on the “Tengu” page).

The next two images are gorgeous ukiyo-e triptychs on the same theme. The first is by Kawanabe Kyōsai, the artist who designed the hyakki yagyō accordion book discussed elsewhere on this site. Here the person throwing the beans is Kintarō, a legendary boy hero; he’s surrounded by grown women in what appears to be the women’s quarters of a wealthy household. The oni he’s chasing away are depicted as comically small figures reminiscent of yanari 家鳴, “house creaks,” tiny oni famously illustrated by Toriyama Sekien; like Sekien's yanari, these oni are tumbling around on the veranda of a house. The mismatch between Kintarō and the oni, and the busy colors and patterns of this print, lend it a festive air, to say the least.

A creepier take on the same idea is found in the next image, a triptych by Tsukioka Yoshitoshi (discussed in relation to cats elsewhere on this site). Here the boy hero is Peach Boy (Momotarō 桃太郎), who famously conquered an island of oni with his sidekicks Pheasant, Monkey, and Dog. Daikoku and Ebisu, two of the Seven Gods of Fortune, look on as Peach Boy (in kabuki makeup) tosses beans at two fleeing oni. In contrast to the cheerful spirit of the previous print, this one places the scene in the dead of night and surrounds the figures with darkness. Behind the red and blue demon are a large cluster of demons rendered in gray—suggesting they’re invisible to the participants in the scene. The barely glimpsed chaos gives this print something of the air of a hyakki yagyō scene.

The final image is a senjafuda announcing a women’s senjafuda exchange meeting to take place in the first hours of the New Year. Oni can be seen fleeing a girl holding a votive slip, rather than a man throwing beans. Other slips imagining an intersection of setsubun customs and senjafuda are discussed on the “Collectors and oni” page.

**Shōki**
In the slips depicting setsubun traditions, oni are usually present but deemphasized, reduced in size or dignity or both, as in the Kyōsai print. Their function in setsubun traditions, after all, is to be chased away—they represent the baleful influences and ill fortune we wish to be free of. Oni play a similar role in the images above, which all depict a figure known as Shōki 鍾馗 (Ch. Zhong Kui), a demon queller of Chinese legend. Like King Enma, then, Shōki himself is no demon, but is always depicted in the company of demons, and displays an oni-like ferocity. Shōki iconography was popular in early modern Japan (and therefore in senjafuda) both for his obviously charismatic ferocity and because images of Shōki were used as charms to ward off illness, particularly smallpox.

The first image above is an ukiyo-e by Utagawa Kuniyoshi (discussed in connection with cats elsewhere) that shows the standard Shōki iconography: a massive warrior in Chinese garb with a great flowing beard and a big sword, with an oni cowering in fear. The next several images all adapt this basic iconography to the senjafuda format, usually with a clever twist.

The next three are discussed on the “World of senjafuda” page. They are a typical one-chō and two two-chō slips utilizing Shōki as a motif. In the two-chō slips, the oni are fleeing in a flurry of daimeifuda, suggesting either that the power of the slips is helping drive them away or that the oni were pasting or collecting slips (either idea would be in line with senjafuda practitioners’ self-presentation).

The first slip above has Shōki sticking his arm through a window-like roundel; his gaze and the motion of his sword suggest less demon-quelling than paddling a naughty child. The parent-child motif implicit here is made explicit in the next two slips. The first shows Kintarō besting Shōki, who is tumbling backward in alarm. The second shows Shōki eyeing Kintarō warily, as if trying to decide if he needs quelling.

The rest of the slips above are, like many of the Enma slips further up the page, not depictions of Shōki himself, but depictions-of-depictions of Shōki. The first shows the Shōki-and-oni figure that sat atop one of the Kanda Festival floats; this is from the same series as the tengu float-topper discussed elsewhere.

The next two slips both show banners depicting Shōki, which were often displayed on the fifth day of the fifth month, a holiday known as Tango no Sekku. This day was marked by displaying dolls, banners, streamers, and other decorations bearing imagery thought to be auspicious for the raising of strong, healthy boys (Momotarō and Kintarō were also popular motifs). Note that in both of these slips, Shōki is depicted in red. Banners with auspicious masculine imagery rendered in red were thought to be charms against smallpox; prints in red ink were made for the same purpose, and were known as hōsōe 疱瘡絵 or “smallpox pictures.”

The last image of Shōki above (further discussed on the “Nostalgia” page) may be meant to suggest a hōsōe. It’s another depiction of the Kanda Festival float showing Shōki.

**Ōtsue**
The images above relate to another type of religious folk art featuring oni: Ōtsue or “Ōtsu pictures.” The name comes from the fact that they were specialties of the town of Ōtsu on the southern edge of Lake Biwa; this was a town on the Tōkaidō, the main road connecting Edo and Kyoto, so any traveler between the country’s two biggest population centers would pass through it. Ōtsue were simple pictures, often with a religious theme, sold to tourists.

As popular souvenirs throughout the Edo period, their distinctively primitive imagery became widely recognizable, as did their repertoire of stock images. They were also seen as important examples of early printed art—they were often made with simple printed outlines to which color was applied by hand. For all these reasons, they were bound to catch the antiquarian eye of the senjafuda collector. This included Frederick Starr himself, as several examples of Ōtsue made their way into his collection, including the first three images below.

The first, pasted into one of his senjafuda albums, seems older than the other two. It also shows a key motif echoed in senjafuda: an oni dressed as an itinerant monk. Key to the iconography of this figure is the small gong hanging around his neck, the T-shaped stick with which it is beaten, and the pad of paper hanging from his sash in which to record the names of almsgivers. The next two are more recent than the first; they’re stamped “Ōtsue” and have the artist’s name: Shōzan, a modern Ōtsue revivalist. The first is another version of the oni-priest motif, while the second shows a thunder god trying to snag a drum that has fallen from his cloud.  

The next two images are senjafuda adaptations of the Ōtsue oni-priest; especially in the case of the second one, it’s probably fairer to say that they’re senjafuda playfully masquerading as Ōtsue. Each has a pad of paper on which is written, not “almsgivers,” but the daimei of the sponsor of the slip. The first one says “Kanda” in the upper portion of the slip, identifying the neighborhood in which the sponsor lives; the second one has a Sanskrit character that represents the bodhisattva Miroku.

The last two images repurpose the Ōtsue oni-priest for humorous purposes. In the first image, he’s carrying a maiden across a river on his back; the maiden is holding a sprig of wisteria. In fact, the wisteria maiden was another popular Ōtsue theme, so this is a humorous pairing of two Ōtsue in “real life.” The image of a man carrying a woman across a river on his back was a common one in depictions of the Tōkaidō, because most of its river crossings had no bridges; wealthy travelers could be carried across on a platform, while less wealthy ones rode on a porter’s shoulders or simply waded (like the down-on-his-luck Daikoku in the background). The oni-priest is rendered in humorously naturalistic detail, with his gong and mallet tucked into his robes and a decidedly nonplussed expression on his face.

In the second image, an oni-priest kneels on a red carpet in the manner of a rakugo storyteller greeting his audience; the mallet for his gong is placed in front of him much as a storyteller would place his folding fan. The art here is closer to the coarse brushwork of the typical Ōtsue, but the facial expression is lively and personable, suggesting a storyteller just about to crack his first joke.

**A Day in the Life og Oni**
The slips below are a series prepared for an exchange meeting held on February 3, 1925, according to the first slip. The theme isn’t specified, and it’s not immediately apparent from the first slip itself, which shows a Buddhist figure scooping up dead souls with a fishing net.

Iconographically, this may be Amida, but the woven hat on his head (doubling as a halo) also puts one in mind of the bodhisattva Jizō; both figures are seen in the hell scroll series discussed above. In any case, the joke here is that this figure can simultaneously be seen as a fisherman, hat protecting him from the sun, scooping fish from a lotus pond, and as a haloed deity saving sinners from hell. Since the rest of the series depicts oni at leisure, the implication may be that since Amida has saved everybody from hell, the oni are now free to enjoy a little down time.

What follows is one of the cutest series in the whole collection, as we get a glimpse of adorable oni and King Enma himself going about a variety of hobbies and chores.

In order from left to right we see:

King Enma getting a much-needed shoulder rub while an oni sets up two of his demon-headed implements.

Enma conducting a tea ceremony.

An oni tying a bunch of torture implements in a bundle, perhaps to put them away for safekeeping, while gabbing with another oni.

An oni fishing from a riverbank while two more relax on a boat; one is napping while the other is smoking a pipe (note the horns sticking through his hat).

From left to right:

Two oni engaged in a game of go while a third looks on.

Enma seated at his desk catching up on some paperwork, with one of his lieutenants seated next to him. An oni has brought in a cup of tea, so Enma leans back and stretches. Note that Enma isn’t wearing his hat—this is a private moment.

Two oni matrons picking herbs and wildflowers while talking with a child.

A group of oni children playing blind-man’s bluff (the game of tag is called “playing oni” in Japanese, with the child who’s “it” called the oni, making this a double joke). Note the girl oni hiding behind the door.

From left to right:

An oni lying in the grass smoking a pipe while the cauldron he used to tend sits empty. A cat has had kittens in the space where the fire used to be, and the oni’s daughter is bringing him one to play with.

One oni mends clothes while her husband does the washing.

An oni uses Enma’s soul-revealing mirror to do some personal grooming. If the tweezers in his hand aren’t sufficient, he has a set of tongs next to him that were once used to torture sinners.

An oni burns moxa on her husband’s back to relieve his aches and pains (a mild torture compared to what he’s used to dishing out).

From left to right:

Enma relaxing on his throne, reading a newspaper.

An oni enjoying a picnic with his son.

An oni boy sitting on an ox, playing a flute (this was a popular motif in Chinese painting, only with a boy instead of an oni).

An oni putting out the fire on his flaming cart, since he doesn’t need it anymore.

##### References
[1] Michael Dylan Foster, The Book of Yōkai: Mysterious Creatures of Japanese Folklore (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015), pp. 157-67.

[2] Gregory M. Pflugfelder specifically discussed kappa imagery in 19th century Japan in Cartographies of Desire: Male-Male Sexuality in Japanese Discourse, 1600-1950 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), p. 197.

[1] The scene is discussed in more depth in Glynne Walley, Good Dogs: Edification, Entertainment & Kyokutei Bakin’s Nansō Satomi hakkenden (Ithaca: Cornell East Asia Series, 2017), Chapter Six.

[1] Michael Dylan Foster, The Book of Yōkai: Mysterious Creatures of Japanese Folklore (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015), pp. 130-39.

[2] See further discussion in Carolyn Anne Morley, Transformation, Miracles, and Mischief: The Mountain Priest Plays of Kyōgen (Cornell University East Asia Program, 1993).

[3] Haruko Wakabayashi, The Seven Tengu Scrolls: Evil and the Rhetoric of Legitimacy in Medieval Japanese Buddhism (University of Hawai‘i Press, 2012), p. 19.

[1] The most comprehensive treatment of oni in English is Noriko T. Reider, Japanese Demon Lore: Oni from Ancient Times to the Present (Logan, UT: Utah State University Press, 2010).

[2] Caroline Hirasawa, “The Inflatable, Collapsible Kingdom of Retribution: A Primer on Japanese Hell Imagery and Imagination,” Monumenta Nipponica 63.1 (Spring, 2008), pp. 1-50.

{% if page.credits == true %}{% include cb/credits.html %}{% endif %}
