---
title: The World of Senjafuda
layout: senjafuda-collections-at-uo
permalink: /world-of-senjafuda.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: true
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Pasting Senjafuda; Exchanging Senjafuda; Imagining the Collector" %}

Senjafuda 千社札 literally means “thousand-shrine slip,” a term that refers to the phenomenon’s roots in religious pilgrimage. An alternate term used by scholars and collectors is nōsatsu 納札, “donation slip.” To understand what senjafuda are today requires understanding a little about what they used to be in the past.

Senjafuda were originally slips of paper that a pilgrim would paste on a temple or shrine wall or gate, a practice some people still follow today. Slips used for pasting are typically white with black writing that identifies the paster by a pseudonym—called a daimei 題名—and occasionally other elements (such as a house crest or shop logo). Originally senjafuda for pasting could be handwritten, but usually they were woodblock-printed. Senjafuda for pasting were made in a variety of sizes and shapes.

As senjafuda became collector’s items, made for exchange rather than pasting, the size was standardized at about 15 cm (5 in.) high by 5 cm (2 in.) wide. Slips made for exchange can feature complicated pictorial and/or design motifs rendered in full color, but they retain traces of their origins in pasting slips by including the daimei of the person or name of the group that sponsored or commissioned them. As works of art, therefore, senjafuda typically combine both pictorial and verbal elements, with the writing being an integral part of the overall composition.

Similarly, many senjafuda designs came to exceed the standard size, but they were always conceived of in terms of the standard single slip. When used as a unit of size, the slip is called a chō 丁. A single design may therefore occupy two, four, or even larger numbers of slips (i.e., 2 chō, 4 chō, etc.). The design may be formally interrupted by the borders of its individual component slips (meaning it can only be fully appreciated by setting several slips side by side), or it may be continuous, with the edges of the component slips being depicted as if sticking out from behind the design. Part of the fun of senjafuda is how they play with the restrictions imposed by their small size.

Below are three slips each depicting the same motif: Shōki (Zhong Kui in Chinese), a mythical queller of demons. From left, the first is a standard one-chō senjafuda depicting Shōki treading on an oni. The sponsor’s daimei (“Chikamatsu”) may be seen in a block on the top left. Next is a two-chō senjafuda showing Shōki wrestling one oni while another flees in the background; the sponsor’s daimei (“Yamazen”) may be seen in the top right. Note that the edges of the two component slips may be seen peeking out from behind the main design, an indication that this may be thought of as comprising two slips. Third is another two-chō senjafuda showing Shōki chasing away an oni; in this case the edges of the two component slips can also be seen in the center of the composition, dividing the background while Shōki and the oni leap across the frames, so to speak. The brushwork in the third slip is not quite as fine as in the second, but the way the figures cross between the component slips lends the composition a dynamic quality that the second one lacks.

Alternatively, a single slip may contain a self-contained design but be designed as part of a larger group or series of related motifs. This kind of senjafuda can be appreciated as individual works of art but also collectively, as ensembles. Both large multi-slip images and single-slip series are typically produced as group efforts, commissioned as the collective self-representation of a club of senjafuda aficionados. One of the fascinations of senjafuda is the glimpse they give us of social networking among the groups that commissioned, collected, and sometimes pasted senjafuda.

Below are three slips from a series of seasonal motifs. The purple square at the top of each slip contains the daimei in calligraphy; the orange square behind it identifies the season. The slip on the left (“summer”) shows Shōki being startled by Kintarō (a boy of legendary strength who figures in medieval folk tales). The one in the middle (“summer”) shows a large fan and a mask (possibly a beshimi mask from the noh theater, often used for monsters). The one on the right (“autumn”) shows another mask, a hannya or demoness from the noh theatrical tradition, with a striped cane often used as a prop by actors wearing this mask. Each slip may be appreciated on its own or collectively, as part of a playful representation of seasonal motifs (in which yōkai play only a small part).

## Pasting Senjafuda

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Origins and Offerings; Pasting and Play; References" %}

Senjafuda have their roots in religious observance. The ja 社 in senjafuda 千社札 refers to Shintō shrines, and there’s historical evidence that senjafuda culture grew out of devotion to the god Inari, a harvest god worshipped at thousands of shrines throughout Japan. But Buddhism is just as important to senjafuda culture as Shintō: slips were and are also pasted at Buddhist temples, and many senjafuda include Buddhist motifs.

The first slip above relates to Inari worship, and therefore has Shintō connections. The most recognizable is the distinctive double-linteled torii gate seen before every Shrintō shrine (here we’re looking through several in a row). The slip on the right is a representation of the Buddhist conception of Hell, with King Enma judging newly-dead sinners. The swastika-like design on Enma’s desk is an ancient Buddhist symbol still widely used today (and should not be confused with the Nazi swastika)!

##### Origins and Offerings
The practice of pasting senjafuda can be thought of as a specialized variant of the practice of giving offerings to seek blessings or accrue spiritual merit. An offering can be as simple as a few coins tossed into the offertory box found at the threshold of a shrine before praying to the god worshipped there. Or it can be as complicated as copying out an entire Buddhist sutra by hand and presenting it to a temple (a common form of devotion in premodern times). Buildings, icons, and furnishings are commonly presented or funded as offerings, often with the donor or donors identified by name in recognition of their devotion.

One common form of offering is the ema 絵馬, a kind of devotional plaque. Ema literally means “picture horse,” a name that nods to the legendary history of the practice. Anciently, horses were given as gifts to shrines, but then pictures of horses came to be substituted for the real thing; eventually these pictorial offerings came to depict other themes than horses. Ema can take the form of large paintings on wood of religious or historical themes, commissioned by devotees and presented to temples or shrines for display in special buildings. They can also take the form of small wooden plaques with a simple pictorial design unique to each temple or shrine; devotees can buy the ema at the temple or shrine, write a prayer on the back, and hang it at a designated spot on the temple or shrine grounds (or keep the plaque as a souvenir). Ema are a common motif in pictorial senjafuda, perhaps to remind collectors of the larger tradition of votive offerings of which senjafuda are a part. The Starr collection contains senjafuda reproducing large painted ema and many, many slips depicting the smaller ema sold at temples and shrines.

The two senjafuda above depict large painted ema. The one on the left shows the medieval legend of the slaying of the nue. The nue was a chimerical creature (part monkey, part snake, part other animals, depending on the source) that, according to early stories, menaced the Imperial palace until the warrior Minamoto no Yorimasa shot it down with an arrow; his retainer I no Hayata administered the coup de grace with a blade. The next senjafuda shows another medieval legend, that of Ibaraki Dōji, an oni who tangled with warrior hero Watanabe no Tsuna. In their first encounter, Tsuna cut off Ibaraki Dōji’s arm; later the demon visited Tsuna’s house disguised as his aunt and stole back his arm. Both of these senjafuda take the form of large painted ema made for presentation to a temple or shrine, with black lacquer frames with metal ornaments completing the illusion.

The next three all depict the smaller ema sold at temples and shrines. The first one shows two children, presumably on their way back from a visit to an Inari shrine; the one on the right holds a small fox figurine on a stand, while the one on the left shoulders a wooden plaque with two foxes drawn on it. Incidentally, this is a one-chō senjafuda divided into four quarter-size slips; the top two are occupied by the picture of the children, while the bottom two are devoted to separate daimei, and the one on the bottom right is framed as a large presentational ema would be. The next slip shows an ema belonging to the Kijin Shrine; ema produced by the shrine sport this distinctively sketchy pair of oni. The final slip shows another Kijin ema along with one depicting a sumo match (sumo wrestling also has historical connections with Shintō worship), against a background design of ema shapes.

##### Pasting and Play
Symbolically, at least, an ema represents a gift of something of value to a shrine or temple: a horse, or a valuable picture, or simply the money given in exchange for the plaque. Senjafuda, in their earliest form, were meant to represent something else: the devotee himself or herself. Early accounts of the practice extol the virtues of the daimei, which originally meant not the pseudonym itself but rather the practice of writing one’s name and address on a piece of paper and leaving it at a shrine or temple. This was believed to function as a proxy for the worshipper, allowing the worshipper to physically leave the premises while the proxy (the slip) continued to hold a vigil at the place of worship. Of course, leaving one’s name-slip pasted to the wall of a building also let others know that one had made the pilgrimage, effectively boasting that, e.g., “Kōhei was here.”

Early senjafuda pasting was considered a nuisance by religious institutions, akin to graffiti—and, indeed, some practitioners would simply write their daimei directly on the wall of a temple or shrine building. Temples and shrines discouraged the practice and city authorities tried to ban it, but seemingly with little success, for senjafuda culture was thriving by the end of the 18th century. In fact, the prohibitions only seemed to increase enthusiasm for the practice, as senjafuda pilgrims began to compete to place slips in forbidden places, or in spots where priests would be unlikely to notice them or unable to take them down. Senjafuda aficionados even developed specialized tools (long poles with brushes attached to the end) to help them paste slips in hard-to-reach places.

The slip on the left above is a typical daimei senjafuda, as might have been pasted at a temple or shrine. The smaller characters at the top indicate the neighborhood the paster lived in (Kanda), while the larger characters that make up most of the design are the daimei. Typically daimei senjafuda were printed in black; this one is a faded red. Given the torn condition and traces of adhesive on the back (visible from the front at the bottom of the slip), it is speculated that this slip might have been removed from a wall.

The slip on the right above shows a group of pasters out practicing their hobby. The scene is a Shintō shrine in early spring (indicated by the plum blossoms in the background). The corner of the shrine building can be see on the left side of the print; through the door can be glimpsed three ema hanging on the wall. The man sitting on the veranda is applying glue to the back of a slip in preparation for pasting. Next to him stands a man holding the distinctive pasting pole: a collapsible pole with two brushes mounted on the end. The slip would be attached to these brushes so that the paster could place it high overhead. Next to the paster, another man has climbed up onto the base of the gate so he can write his name directly onto it with ink. At right, the other two members of the party are smoking their pipes (one lighting his pipe from the bowl of the other). At their feet is a wooden chest containing senjafuda.

The slip on the left above shows more pasters in action. The man on the right is holding a pole with brushes mounted on the end, which he’s using to paste his daimei slip to a gatepost. The man on the left is writing his daimei directly on the gatepost with ink. Both pasters are depicted as handsome, well-coiffed men in rakish short coats of the type worn by firemen or laborers; a tattoo may be seen on the left forearm of the man on the right. The statue looking down on the pair may seem demonic, with its red flesh, bulging muscles, and wild expression, but it is in fact a Niō or Benevolent King, a Buddhist protector figure; statues of them are often placed in pairs in temple gates. A protective wire mesh has been installed in front of this one—to prevent it being defaced by senjafuda enthusiasts?

The slip on the right above shows a senjafuda enthusiast in an altercation with a priest. The scene is a Buddhist temple, as indicated by the large bell partly seen in the top left, meant to be struck with the log suspended over the men’s heads. The man at the center of the composition is clearly a paster caught in the act—he holds a pasting pole and slips are scattered on the ground around him. At his feet is a man dressed as a temple acolyte. Evidently the acolyte was tasked with chasing away the paster, but their encounter grew violent, and the paster won. The men’s pose, with the paster brandishing his pole like a weapon and trampling the priest underfoot, is (no doubt intentionally) reminiscent of statues of the Shitennō or Four Heavenly Kings often found at temples. These kings, protector figures like the Benevolent Kings mentioned above, are usually depicted in armor and brandishing swords or spears, and are often shown treading on enemies of the faith depicted as demons. This slip, therefore, shows a role reversal, with the senjafuda paster in the position of defender of Buddhism and the acolyte placed in the position of antagonist. It’s a comic conceit (and a fairly common one in senjafuda), but also quite revealing of the self-image of senjafuda aficionados.

As Takiguchi Masaya argues,[1] this spirit of play was part of senjafuda practice from the beginning, i.e. the 18th century. Religious devotion or the desire for blessings may have motivated people to paste their slips on temple or shrine walls, but when pasters began to compete with each other to place their slips in difficult locations, or in as many different shrines and temples as possible, they were acting in a spirit of play. In other words, Takiguchi argues, the senjafuda phenomenon was always a fusion of religious practice with play—a fusion quite characteristic of early modern Japanese popular culture. This play would find its fullest expression in senjafuda clubs.

The slip above—already discussed above as a depiction of pasting activities—is also an expression of the social aspect of senjafuda pasting culture. The pair of pipe-smokers at the right lend an air of camaraderie to the scene, while the plum blossoms emphasize the recreational nature of this outing. This slip can be dated with some certainty, because the man writing on the gate is actually writing, not his name (as the viewer is meant to assume at first glance) but “Spring, Year of the Horse.” Based on the daimei included in the slip, this should be either 1858 or 1870. Note that five men are depicted in the scene, but in the colophon at top right, only four daimei are included. The fifth man is probably identified in the rightmost panel of the colophon, which says “made to order by Gengyo.” Baisotei Gengyo 梅素亭玄魚 (1817-1880) was a print designer and author active in a variety of popular fields in the late Edo and early Meiji years; he was also a key figure in senjafuda culture in that era, under the daimei Takisa 田キサ. The man with the pasting pole appears to have just finished pasting a senjafuda that reads Takisa, suggesting that Gengyo himself is the fifth member of this party, and has self-effacingly placed his daimei in miniature within the illustration instead of in large characters with those of the other four men.

##### References
[1] Takiguchi Masaya 滝口正哉, Senjafuda ni miru Edo no shakai 千社札にみる江戸の社会 (Tokyo: Dōseisha, 2008).



## Exchanging Senjafuda
The act of pasting senjafuda on temple or shrine walls incorporated a spirit of play into what was at least nominally a religious activity. With the arrival of senjafuda for exchange, that spirit of play came to dominate—although the ties to pilgrimage and worship were never entirely forgotten.

##### Exchanging
Contemporary accounts of senjafuda mention exchange meetings happening by the end of the 18th century. In other words, by the 1790s people who were making slips to paste up at religious institutions were also getting together with like-minded people at tea shops or restaurants to trade those slips with each other. By the 1830s, this led to the formation of organized clubs—called ren 連—of senjafuda aficionados. These groups would not only exchange slips with each other, they would hold large meetings at which they would exchange slips with other groups.

Slips meant for pasting continued to be mostly simple monochrome objects, but as collecting and trading slips became the focus of most aficionados' attention, specially designed “exchange slips” (kōkanfuda 交換札) developed. Exchange slips were meant to be appreciated up close rather than glimpsed from afar, and so more attention was paid to their design elements and workmanship.

This led to the elaborate, full-color slips that are the focus of this digital exhibit. Senjafuda aficionados began to enlist the services of professional artists and craftsmen to design and print their exchange slips. Many of these professionals in turn came to participate in the senjafuda world themselves. The higher artistic quality of the slips in turn attracted more participants. The formation of ren allowed for better organization of the design and financing of slips, as well as better coordination of large-scale designs or series of designs.

Part of the playfulness of senjafuda exchange and collecting came simply from the chance to appreciate beautiful, well-made objects. But of course, just as with pasting slips, an element of competition could be present, as individuals or groups strove to outdo one another in the beauty or cleverness of their slips. Cleverness in particular came to be prized in senjafuda design, just as it was in other areas of early modern popular culture.

On this page are two depictions of senjafuda exchange meetings. The one above depicts a meeting taking place on April 10, 1842. The illustration is by Utagawa Hiroshige 歌川広重 (1797-1858), one of the most famous and influential of woodblock print artists. The scene would have been held at a restaurant (restaurants often had large rooms on upper floors that could be rented out for parties), and teacups and teapots can be seen here and there on the floor; the blue background at top shows that sliding doors have been opened to the outside. Hanging from the lintel are handwritten banners; one identifies the ren attending the gathering, and the other says (ironically) “graffiti strictly forbidden.” Some participants are quietly exchanging slips, while others are clamoring energetically to claim ones they particularly want; a group of men in the bottom right corner are peacefully perusing slips that have been pasted into scrapbooks. This slip captures a noisy, fun atmosphere that goes a long way toward explaining the popularity of this activity.

The second depiction of an exchange meeting (above) is actually the left four chō of an eight-chō print (the full piece is reproduced in Sekioka 1983).[1] The print depicts an exchange meeting that took place on October 15, 1861; the illustration is by Utagawa Hiroshige II (1826-69), pupil of the first Hiroshige. As on the earlier print, the artist has added circles labeling many of the participants. Note that women are depicted as being among the participants.

##### Collecting and Appreciating
Play is key to understanding the way yōkai are used in senjafuda. Beauty, a pleasing design rendered with fine workmanship, was of course important to senjafuda, just as it was in woodblock prints. But, again like woodblock prints, senjafuda designs were full of creative references to other cultural phenomena: poems, plays, fashions, books, historical events, customs, tourist attractions, legends, and many other artifacts of material or narrative culture. 

Yōkai, for example, feature in senjafuda both because they were popular and attractive motifs in their own right and also because they allowed artists and collectors to make witty references to well-known stories, plays, works of art, or other phenomena that a viewer of the time might be expected to recognize. We might think of senjafuda as the early modern woodblock-printed equivalent of internet memes. And just like internet memes, senjafuda can be difficult to fully understand for someone removed from the context of their initial creation.

The slip above is an example of the multilayered referentiality and puzzle-like playfulness that senjafuda typically contain. It’s one of a series of slips presenting imagined textile patterns, three per 2-chō slip. Each of these patterns contains some sort of pun or complicated reference, some of which are explained by the name given to the pattern, others of which are explained (elliptically) by written commentary next to the design. Let’s start with the textile pattern on the top right, the most relevant to our yōkai-centered project. It shows a repeating pattern of a stick puppet of a fox in anthropomorphized form (perhaps the result of shape-shifting), with a smaller puppet of a horse on its hand. The title of this pattern, “Souvenir of Ōji,” tips us off that this is meant to represent a toy one might buy at the Ōji Inari Shrine, and indeed stick puppets of foxes are one type of souvenir sold there. But why the horse puppet? That’s explained in the caption beneath the textile: “Not quite putting a fox on a horse’s back, instead this is the start of the First Horse observances.” The problem is, this explanation itself is a puzzle. The first part is a reference to a proverbial expression, “setting a fox on a horse’s back,” which describes something precarious, unstable, or unreliable. This isn’t quite that, of course, because rather than a fox on a horse’s back we see a horse on a fox’s hand. The second part of the explanation refers to the “first horse” festival, the tradition of making a pilgrimage to an Inari shrine on the first Day of the Horse (as designated by the Chinese zodiac cycle) in the second month of the year. Here the horse is being represented literally. The whole image, then, is a multilayered reference to the Ōji Inari shrine, annual observances at all Inari shrines, the kinds of souvenirs one might buy there, the shape-shifting abilities of the foxes that serve Inari, and an old proverb. It’s a handsome textile design, too.

The design on the top left isn’t quite as complicated. The repeated motif is a silhouette of a quiver with arrows sticking out of it. The design is named “Daikyūgata,” which could be interpreted as meaning “longbow pattern” (with bow being metonymic for arrows and quiver). The caption on the left says it “came from a Rikyūgata,” or “Rikyū shape,” which was a kind of ornamental comb: crescent-shaped, with square ends. There’s a verbal pun with Rikyūgata twisted into Daikyūgata, matched with a visual pun, a quiver-and-arrows meant to resemble an ornamental comb. The caption even contains a little bit of wordplay in its own right: saying the pattern "came from a Rikyūgata" can be interpreted as meaning, not only that the shape of the quiver is reminiscent of a comb, but also, perhaps, that we should imagine the arrows actually sticking out of a comb.

The third design is even simpler. It shows cute little mice, and it’s called “Small Mouse Crest,” or nezumi komon. Where’s the joke? Nezumi komon is part of the title of a famous kabuki play from 1858: Nezumi komon haru no shingata, or The Small Mouse Crest: A New Pattern for Spring. The play is better known as Nezumi Kozō, or The Mouse Kid, the nickname of the outlaw hero it centers on, a kind of Robin Hood figure who aided the common folk. Viewers who knew the original title of the play would see in this pattern a literal rendering of the play's title, and therefore a reference to a swashbuckling rogue, as well as cute little mice. 

There’s one more reference to unpack here. The entire series is quite possibly a reference to a well known picture book from 1784 called Tanagui awase, or The Hand-Towel Contest. It purports to chronicle a party at which various authors, illustrators, courtesans, and other luminaries of the Floating World each displayed hand towels whose original designs made just the kind of complicated, playful, and elegant references found in the textile designs we’ve been discussing. It’s unclear whether such a party actually took place; perhaps, like the textile designs, the hand-towel patterns only ever existed as illustrations. In any case, the book has been celebrated ever since as a classic example of Floating World chic. Our undated series of textile designs is acknowledging its inspiration, while adapting its ideas to new jokes and a new format: the senjafuda series.

##### Nostalgia
The previous sections explain essentially the way senjafuda have been made and used from the early 19th century right up to the present day. That is, they were and are privately published miniature works of art, commissioned by collectors but drawn and printed by specialists in the craft of woodblock printing. One more key change happened in senjafuda between the early modern period and today, however: they became an expression of nostalgia.

Senjafuda exchange and collecting continued to grow in popularity over the course of the 19th century, despite or perhaps in some ways because of the immense transformations Japanese society was undergoing in this era. The Meiji Period (1868-1912) was, as any student of Japanese history knows, the period when everything changed, as the country scrambled to modernize after two centuries or more of relative isolation during which the West experienced an industrial revolution that left Japan far behind. Government, education, industry, defense, and many more aspects of national life were reorganized in ways inspired by (or in reaction to) Western colonial powers. The way people dressed and groomed themselves, the kinds of houses they lived in and buildings they worked in, even the language they spoke changed drastically and swiftly.

These changes were accompanied by intense and long-lasting debates over what was happening. The net effect of the changes often seemed to be that Japan was coming to look more and more like the West, or parts of it; some people celebrated this, while others regretted it. Debates over modernization were also, to some extent, debates over Westernization. And in these debates, representations of the past, particularly the recent past of the late 18th and early 19th centuries, were employed as critiques of where Japan now found itself and where it seemed to be going.

Senjafuda from the early and middle parts of the 19th century use early modern artistic techniques and motifs because that was the state of the art. By the end of the 19th century, though, woodblock printing was no longer the state of the art for publishing, having been largely crowded out by movable type and photography, among other technologies. But senjafuda continued—and continue today—to be made by the older methods. Similarly, while one can find example of modern motifs (Western clothing, for example) or design sensibilities in senjafuda, by and large the aesthetic has continued to be that of the early and middle 19th century.

In other words, while the rest of Japanese life changed, senjafuda culture decided to remain as true as it could to the way things used to be—or the way modern people imagine the way things used to be. While the full dimensions of this reaction are too complex to be explored here, it’s fair to say this is a nostalgic, even antiquarian art form, and has been since at least the early 20th century. Modern senjafuda self-consciously preserve and perpetuate the aesthetics, technologies, and most importantly the subject matter of the early modern era.

Most of the images in this digitial exhibition date from a period spanning the end of the 19th and the first three decades of the 20th century. A few date from as early as the mid-19th century, and a few date from the post-World War II period. In all but the earliest of these images, what we’re seeing is conditioned by this desire to preserve the past. This is why yōkai are such a perfect match for senjafuda, because yōkai are also dependent on the visual culture of the early modern period. Pictures of shape-shifting foxes or tengu, demons or Shōki the demon-queller, are almost always doubling as representations of the Traditional Past. So are senjafuda.

The pair of slips above exemplifies the nostalgia inherent in most modern senjafuda, while revealing their status as products of the modern era. In terms of form, these are two separate slips, but several duplicates of this set are held by the JSMA and none of them have been cut apart, suggesting that they were understood to be related images despite no formal connection. And when one reads the text on each, the relationship becomes clear. The slip on the left depicts Shōki (explained in more detail elsewhere) in bright red. The red writing at the bottom of the slip not only shows Shōki’s name on a wooden plaque, it informs us that this is the Kanda Festival float sponsored by the Tachō 2-chōme neighborhood of Kanda. The daimei, rendered in black, reads Isetatsu. There’s no date, but they’re part of the Starr collection, so can’t be any later than 1933.

Isetatsu was the daimei of a woodblock printer in Kanda who did business under the name Kikujudō. Founded in 1864, Kikujudō's shop survives today and still specializes in printed matter with Edo-esque motifs. The slip on the right is an advertisement for Kikujudō’s products, listing various kinds of paper including chiyogami (patterned papers of the type used in origami and other crafts—Isetatsu’s specialty today), handheld fans of both folding and non-folding varieties (both made of paper attached to wooden frames), paper napkins, standing screens, calendars, paper toys, and woodblock printing services, as well as nishikie (full-color woodblock-printed art). The address of the shop is given at bottom left (Kanda Tachō 2-20) along with a telephone number (Kanda-1950).

Together the two slips speak volumes about the relationship between past and present in senjafuda culture. The slip on the left contains virtually nothing that marks it as a product of the 1920s or 1930s. The slip on the right, however, is a frank advertisement for a modern business, complete with the latest in contact information. The traditional flavor of the slip on the left functions as further advertisement for a shop that was already specializing in old-fashioned paper and printing methods: it was just good marketing for Isetatsu/Kikujudō to present itself as upholding traditional culture in the form of the Kanda Festival and its associated iconography. There’s even a bit of advertising/nostalgia-marketing involved in the fact that the Shōki float is rendered in red. As discussed elsewhere on this site, Shōki was a common motif in red-printed hōsōe 疱瘡絵, “smallpox pictures,” where the combination of red pigment and fierce motif was traditionally held to ward off smallpox in an era before modern medicine. Smallpox pictures, although not listed among Kikujudō’s wares on the right, would have been something an early modern printer sold. This further nod to tradition both reminded the viewer that Isetatsu was a printer and bolstered Isetatsu’s preservationist brand—something that, perhaps ironically for a contemporary viewer, only has meaning in a modern context.

##### References
[1] Sekioka Senrei 関岡扇令, ed. Edo korekushon: Senjafuda 江戸コレクション　千社札. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1983.



## Imagining the Collector
This section of the exhibit will make more sense if you’ve already read the sections called “Pasting senjafuda” and “Exchanging senjdafuda.” Here we’ll explore the playful, meme-like referentiality of senjafuda by showing how images of yōkai have been employed to comment on the history and nature of senjafuda culture and its participants. In particular we’ll be looking at images of foxes, tengu, and oni as they relate to senjafuda pasting and collecting; for general information and further depictions of these yōkai please follow the links above.

##### Collectors and Foxes
Foxes are easily the most common yōkai in the Starr collection of senjafuda, but they do not always appear in their yōkai form.

Foxes in Japanese folklore and popular culture have three main aspects. One is as normal animals; the occasional golden or reddish fox seen in senjafuda may be acknowledgments of this. Another is as shape-shifting magical foxes; these are the classic foxes or kitsune of yōkai stories. The third is as servants of the god Inari, protector of agriculture and harvests. Like shape-shifting foxes, Inari-servant foxes are usually depicted as white, and are often accompanied by balls of flame or other indications of supernatural potency. Stone statues of foxes are usually found in front of Inari shrines, and Inari ema often feature illustrations of foxes.

It is in this capacity as Inari’s familiars that foxes most frequently appear in senjafuda. This seems to be an acknowledgment, as well as a survival, of senjafuda’s historical roots in Inari worship. Inari was a particularly popular god among the commoners of Edo, with small shrines in many neighborhoods of the city. One popular form of worship was the senjamairi 千社参り or “thousand shrine pilgrimage,” a visit to as many Inari shrines as one could find. Sekioka Senrei argues that this practice became so intertwined with early votive-slip pasting that the name of the one came to be used for the other: thus senjafuda, or “thousand-shrine slips.”

Originally, then, harifuda may have been most frequently used in pilgrimages to Inari shrines. In a classic example of early modern self-reflexivity, a frequent motif in kōkanfuda is Inari worship. We see shrine buildings, shrine gates, and most of all Inari foxes. Sometimes these are in the (relatively) realistic form of the familiar stone statues of foxes that one would find at a shrine. Sometimes they are in the doubly self-reflexive form of Inari foxes depicted on Inari shrine ema (in turn depicted on senjafuda). And sometimes they are in the form of live foxes leaping or flying about in ways that suggest god-derived power. It is these last that remind us of the close connection, or lack of any clear distinction, between yōkai foxes and divine foxes. The same iconography of dancing flames and white fur that marks an Inari fox is used in stage productions to signify shape-shifting foxes (as in the play Yoshitsune and the Thousand Cherry Trees).

The first slip above depicts a stone fox statue next to the gate to an Inari shrine. The tree in the left foreground has a straw rope with white paper strips hanging from it to indicate that it’s a sacred tree. Three ema are hanging from the tree, as is a straw doll. The doll adds a spooky touch, since it was believed that one could curse somebody by nailing a straw doll representing them to a sacred tree at midnight. The shrine gate has a senjafuda pasted to it that says “first slip,” indicating that this is the first image in a series. The bottom of the gate has “graffiti” that gives the date: 1929.

The second slip above comes from a series depicting ema. The ema are labeled with the particular blessing they are meant to request, rather than the name of the shrine they belong to (which a viewer was presumably meant to recognize). The top ema in this slip shows two divine foxes flying near the top of a shrine gate surrounded by red and blue wish-fulfilling jewels; it promises answers to “all requests.” The bottom ema shows a fox next to rice plants, with a wish-fulfilling jewel over its back; promises a “bountiful harvest.”

The third slip belongs to the same series. The bottom ema shows two foxes seated in front of a shrine gate. Between them is a flaming wish-fulfilling jewel. The ema is labeled “fulfillment of all requests.”

The fourth slip is also from the ema series. The bottom ema shows two foxes with a flaming wish-fulfilling jewel between them. The ema promises “exorcism of fox possession.”

The images below are perfect examples of the use of foxes in senjafuda in an Inari context. They’re selections from a large set of one-panel slips depicting different Inari shrines. At the top of each slip is a pair of shrine foxes; the distinctive blue and red stripes on the base mark these as clay figurines (Imado-yaki 今戸焼) sold to worshipers. One of these bears the name of the shrine being referenced, and the other the daimei of a senjafuda practitioner; an unusual feature of this design is that the daimei are presented in the same calligraphic style as the shrine name, rather than in the distinctive senjafuda calligraphy usually used. This creates a pleasing symmetry and thematic equivalence between shrine and worshiper. Beneath these is an illustration connected in some way with the shrine. Not all of the illustrations feature foxes, and the ones that do use them in a variety of ways, all depending on the viewer’s knowledge of the shrine and the lore connected with it.

From left to right:

The slip for the Sankō Inari in Ningyō-chō shows a pair of anthropomorphized cats, a mother and child, no doubt in reference to this shrine’s reputation for helping worshipers find lost housecats.

The slip for the Chōei Inari in Ikegami shows a divine fox appearing on a cloud to the medieval Buddhist cleric Nichiren; the shrine is connected to the headquarters of Nichiren’s sect, the Ikegami Honmonji, and the Chōei Inari is considered Nichiren’s protector.

The slip for the Michiwake Inari in Fukagawa shows a street entertainer amusing a child with a fox puppet.

The slip for the Tamahime Inari in Asakusa shows a fox dressed up as a princess (Tamahime means “jewel princess”).

Other reminders of the close connection between yōkai foxes and Inari foxes can be seen in the two images below.

Above is a scene of two men who have been taken in by foxes who are pretending to be hairdressers. The man on the right is gritting his teeth while the fox-barber pulls his topknot tight. The man on the left is admiring the fox-barber’s handiwork by holding mirrors in front of his face and behind his head—or so he thinks. The “mirror” behind his head is actually an ema that reads Ryōgoku, an Edo neighborhood. The box and brush in the bottom right corner identify these men as senjafuda enthusiasts on a pasting excursion, probably to one of the Inari shrines in the neighborhood—one of their slips can be seen on the crosspiece of the shrine gate in the background. Perhaps to get back at the men for their impudence, the shrine’s fox guardians have bewitched them.

The scene above shows a stone fox statue in front of a series of shrine gates belonging to the Anamori Inari in Tokyo. The placement of the statue is unexpected, since typically such statues are found in pairs flanking the gate, not blocking the worshiper's way like this. The fox's inscrutable stare combines with the monochrome design of the print to lend an air of otherworldliness to an otherwise ordinary encounter.

##### Collectors and Tengu
If foxes are a nod to senjafuda’s historical roots in Inari worship, tengu are a nod toward a more legendary aspect of senjafuda history. In fact, tengu are probably the yōkai most intimately related to the history and self-conception of senjafuda practice, athough just how this is true is not always obvious to the untrained eye. It has to do with one of the most significant figures in senjafuda history, a man named Hagino Kinai Nobutoshi, but known in senjafuda circles as Tengu Kōhei.

Tengu Kōhei was an 18th century samurai, and was said to have been born in either 1707 or 1717, which would put him at either 90 or 100 years of age at his death in 1817. A number of early accounts of senjafuda credit him with popularizing the practice beginning in the 1750s, when his lord sent him on a pilgrimage on behalf of his younger brother, who had smallpox. Historians such as Takiguchi Masaya suggest that, based on contemporary records, there were others who were more active than Tengu Kōhei was in this period, but it’s he who got celebrated later as the key figure in 18th century senjafuda. This might have been due to his social class: as a samurai, acting at first in an official capacity, he would have lent an air of official respectability to a pastime that ran afoul of officialdom on more than one occasion.

Tengu Kōhei came to be of such talismanic significance to later practitioners that the anniversary of his death, April 1, came to be observed with special rites at the temple where he was buried. He is depicted in numerous later senjafuda, such as this large, handsome 8-slip composition. We see Tengu Kōhei depicted as a dignified old man, his white hair and beard more than a little reminiscent of the okina mask used in noh to represent an old man and a god. He is dressed for travel, suggesting we’re seeing him on one of his numerous pilgrimages, and he holds a box for his senjafuda and the distinctive pole-mounted brushes used for pasting. The sword at his waist reminds us he’s a samurai, if his regal bearing hasn’t already tipped us off.

There is no hint of the tengu in this portrait of Tengu Kōhei. Should there be? His daimei sounds like there should, but in fact his name is usually written not with the standard characters for the yōkai tengu 天狗, but with characters meaning “heaven’s fool” 天愚. But that hardly negates the sound association with yōkai tengu—in fact, it turns his name into precisely the kind of pun that early modern people relished. In other words, despite the fact that his name is written differently, we may expect that he was inviting us to see him as a tengu.

And that is precisely what some other senjafuda that refer to him do.

The first slip above features a partial reproduction of one of Tengu Kōhei’s own harifuda on the right (it gives the full version of his daimei, Kyūkoku Tengu Kōhei). On the top left it gives us a caricature meant to represent Kōhei himself. Two jokes are embedded in the caricature. First, the lines that constitute it are, in fact, the characters for “Kyūkoku” and “Kōhei,” radically deformed. Second, the face is drawn in the shape of a tengu mask, with the giveaway protruding nose. This mask forms the missing “tengu” element of the name, and also tells us that senjafuda practitioners clearly associated Tengu Kōhei with the yōkai.

The second slip associates a later practitioner with Tengu Kōhei. The characters running down the right edge say “Past—Tengu Kōhei,” while those running down the left edge say “Present—Ōma Heikō.” The large characters in the center say “Heikō,” the name of a present-day senjafuda aficionado (and of course phonetically “Heikō” is “Kōhei” in reverse). Above Heikō’s name is a similar character-based caricature of a tengu mask, labeled “the original paster.”

The third slip features a partial closeup of a well-known harifuda belonging to Tengu Kōhei himself. In large characters we see “Kyūkoku” and “Ten” with “gu” cut off by the orange daimei label. The daimei cleverly associates the sponsor with Tengu Kōhei, however, because the daimei reads “Tenman Ōnaka,” with the “ten” of the daimei picking up where the “ten” of Kōhei leaves off—a graphic illustration of how closely later practitioners identified with their famous predecessor.

The fourth slip shows a closeup of a different section of Tengu Kōhei’s harifuda. It almost, but doesn’t quite, link up with the one on the left.

Why would Tengu Kōhei choose to associate himself with a yōkai? Since, on the surface, he didn’t, we can’t know for sure. But for anyone aware of the tengu’s complicated relationship to Buddhism in medieval legend, there couldn’t be a more appropriate choice. Tengu are both enemies of Buddhism and protectors of it, monstrous parodies of monks and embodiments of priestly transcendence. Like tengu, senjafuda practitioners had a love/hate relationship with temples: practitioners saw (or pretended to see) pasting as a devotional act, but temples tended to see it as anything but. Senjafuda practitioners could see themselves as, like tengu, simultaneously heroic in their faith and outlaws in their expression of it.

The first slip above is part of a series based on iroha karuta, a card-matching game linked to the Japanese syllabary. In its orthodox form, one set of cards would each have a poem on it beginning with a different syllable. Another set of cards would have that syllable accompanied by an illustration. The picture-cards would be scattered on the floor, and one person would read the poem while other players scrambled to find the matching card. In this case, instead of poems the upper card contains a phrase having to do with senjafuda or one of the members of the ren. This one says “Uokin, a nōsatsu lover.” The bottom card has the corresponding syllable “no” plus an illustration of a tengu examining a piece of wood (or coral?) mounted in an ikebana dish. This is an example of a tengu being used to represent a senjafuda participant.

The second slip provides another example of tengu as part of a participant’s self-representation. The linked circled design at the top (actually a stylized 中 or “naka”), plus the smaller slip-within-a-slip, identify this as part of a series for the Nakabashi ren. The larger slip-within-a-slip has thumbnail sketches of an arrow, a crow tengu, and a butterfly. This is a rebus for the name of the participant.

The third slip, for Daichin (or Ōchin) of the Hakkaku-ren, features the familiar tengu caricature with the phrase, “The fuda tengu who lives on Mount Kuramae.” This is a pun on Mount Kurama, the peak near Kyoto where Minamoto no Yoshitsune, according to legend, was trained in martial arts by the Great Tengu. Kuramae, meanwhile, is a neighborhood in Edo.

The fourth slip is a different copy of the Starr slip discussed on a previous page. The Starr collection understandably contains several copies of this slip.

##### Collectors and Oni
Unlike foxes and tengu, oni have no intrinsic connection with the history of senjafuda. But the sheer frequency with which they occur as pictorial motifs in senjafuda ensures that at least some of their appearances will be self-referential. And indeed, there are several charming examples of oni interacting with senjafuda pasters or collectors, or with votive slips themselves.

The slips above depict, from left to right:

A set of matching-game cards pairing Oni with the name Ōta Setchō.

A fierce-looking oni biting down on an ema decorated like a senjafuda (with a daimei and a ren logo).

A thunder god on a cloud fishing for senjafuda.

Another example of the thunder god fishing motif. Here he has caught a bag of puffed rice snacks.

The first slip above represents the traditional spring ritual of scattering toasted beans to chase away demons. Here an actual oni is shown fleeing the beans.

On the second slip, instead of beans the oni is fleeing a shower of senjafuda—a nice contrast to the thunder god trying to catch senjafuda.

The third slip shows an oni fleeing senjafuda thrown by a girl instead of a man.

In light of the previous two examples, it seems likely that the oni on the fourth slip above is fleeing the daimei visible in the top right (which read "Starr" and "Maebashi").

The last slip above is a large (8-chō) depiction of Enma, King of Hell, by famed Meiji-era artist Kawanabe Kyōsai. Instead of his characteristic flat scepter, Enma holds a senjafuda.

##### Pasting on Enma
Two types of oni interaction with senjafuda practitioners deserve special mention. One is how statues of oni—almost always Enma the King of Hell, actually—are depicted within senjafuda as targets of pasting activity. The act of pasting a slip on a statue would have been particularly appealing to some aficionados because of the daring and irreverence it required; celebrating (or imagining) it in a senjafuda was therefore a celebration of the peculiarly iconoclastic nature of senjafuda devotion.

The first slip above shows a statue of Enma with four senjafuda pasted to his chest. The composition emphasizes both the monumental size of the statue and the comical impudence of the pasters' achievement.

The second slip represents a statue of Enma with a senjafuda pasted onto his nose. The miniature senjafuda pasted onto Enma’s nose is actually a separate piece of thin paper pasted onto the larger slip.

The third slip is a gargantuan 32-chō image of a statue of Enma festooned with senjafuda.

##### Oni in Hell
The other special type of oni interaction with senjafuda has to do with the oni’s role as tormentors in the Buddhist conception of hell. As we have seen, senjafuda were originally a form of worship, and therefore a tool of devotion. But since temples and shrines (and sometimes governmental authorities) frowned on them, they were also a form of transgressive play. This means that senjafuda practitioners were always conscious of being in an ambiguous relationship to organized religion, an ambiguity captured in the image of the tengu as well as in the depictions of King Enma defaced (literally in some cases) by senjafuda. Perhaps the ultimate expression of senjafuda self-consciousness comes in images of pasters being punished in hell for their activities. At least three versions of this theme may be found in the UO’s collection of senjafuda.

The most straightforward is this one, a scene of Enma judging sinners newly arrived in hell. In the top left corner the newly dead are relieved of their clothes by Datsueba (the Clothes-Stripping Crone) on the banks of the Sanzu River, which they must cross to enter the afterworld. In the middle of the image is Enma at his desk, reading from a scroll. At Enma’s shoulder is the grotesque Seeing Eye and Sniffing Nose, which help him discern people’s misdeeds. Assorted sinners and oni crowd the space in front of Enma’s desk, but the key to the image is the mirror on the left. Enma’s mirror displays to sinners the sins in life that they’ll be punished for in death. In this mirror we see senjafuda practitioners: one holding a pole-mounted brush, and another writing on a temple gate. The message is clear: these men are being punished for defacing temple property. But another message is equally clear: the people who commissioned this image are endlessly entertained by the prospect. This image’s combination of faith and irreverence perfectly encapsulates senjafuda culture.

A more elaborate treatment of the same motif can be found in the 24-chō horizontal composition below. It takes the form of a hell scroll, a common motif in medieval Buddhist art. This scroll is mounted on purple fabric. On the far right we can see the outer cover of the scroll, curling toward the viewer, with red cords peeking out from behind it. At far left is the inner section of the scroll, extra paper attached to a wooden rod around which the scroll is wrapped. Scrolls read from right to left, and when we view this one that way we can follow the progress of the newly dead through hell. First we see a milepost that says “Sanzu River,” and then we see sinners surrendering their clothes to Datsueba. After that is a small gap left by a missing panel, but the next panel shows the end of Enma's desk and the Seeing Eye, allowing us to imagine the figure of Enma that's missing. From there we follow the dead souls through various gory and horrific punishments at the hands of oni, all rendered in fantastic detail, until at the other end of the scroll we see the bodhisattva Jizō arriving to rescue the sinners. The final image is of the Buddha hovering above lotus blossoms, waiting to welcome the delivered souls of the dead—a happy ending, in other words.

The mirror by Enma's desk doesn't show the viewer what these sinners have done, but we can guess, particularly if we read the inscription at the beginning of the scroll. It informs us that this piece was designed as a tribute to three recently-deceased senjafuda practitioners. The composition thus allows the ren to imagine their deceased friends being appropriately punished for their hobby, but ultimately saved for their devotion. The result is a tour de force of senjafuda that's both playful and deeply moving.

It's a shame that the Starr collection is missing the slip showing Enma. But the Shōbundō collection contains a later set of senjafuda that reproduce this composition, allowing us to see what Enma would have looked like in this context (below). It also allows us to appreciate some of the differences in workmanship between earlier senjafuda (the Starr series is dated 1930) and later (the Shōbundō series is from circa 1965).

{% if page.credits == true %}{% include cb/credits.html %}{% endif %}
